

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

Guide for Shoring/
Reshoring of Concrete 
Multistory Buildings
Reported by ACI Committee 347
ACI 347.2R-17

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

First Printing
January 2017
ISBN: 978-1-945487-51-4
Guide for Shoring/Reshoring of Concrete Multistory Buildings
Copyright by the American Concrete Institute, Farmington Hills, MI. All rights reserved. This material 
may not be reproduced or copied, in whole or part, in any printed, mechanical, electronic, film, or other 
distribution and storage media, without the written consent of ACI.
The technical committees responsible for ACI committee reports and standards strive to avoid 
ambiguities, omissions, and errors in these documents. In spite of these efforts, the users of ACI 
documents occasionally find information or requirements that may be subject to more than one 
interpretation or may be incomplete or incorrect. Users who have suggestions for the improvement of 
ACI documents are requested to contact ACI via the errata website at http://concrete.org/Publications/
DocumentErrata.aspx. Proper use of this document includes periodically checking for errata for the most 
up-to-date revisions.
ACI committee documents are intended for the use of individuals who are competent to evaluate the 
significance and limitations of its content and recommendations and who will accept responsibility for 
the application of the material it contains. Individuals who use this publication in any way assume all 
risk and accept total responsibility for the application and use of this information.
All information in this publication is provided “as is” without warranty of any kind, either express or 
implied, including but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular 
purpose or non-infringement.
ACI and its members disclaim liability for damages of any kind, including any special, indirect, incidental, 
or consequential damages, including without limitation, lost revenues or lost profits, which may result 
from the use of this publication.
It is the responsibility of the user of this document to establish health and safety practices appropriate 
to the specific circumstances involved with its use. ACI does not make any representations with regard 
to health and safety issues and the use of this document. The user must determine the applicability of 
all regulatory limitations before applying the document and must comply with all applicable laws and 
regulations, including but not limited to, United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA) health and safety standards.
Participation by governmental representatives in the work of the American Concrete Institute and in 
the development of Institute standards does not constitute governmental endorsement of ACI or the 
standards that it develops.
Order information: ACI documents are available in print, by download, on CD-ROM, through electronic 
subscription, or reprint and may be obtained by contacting ACI.
Most ACI standards and committee reports are gathered together in the annually revised ACI Manual of 
Concrete Practice (MCP).
American Concrete Institute
38800 Country Club Drive
Farmington Hills, MI 48331
Phone: +1.248.848.3700
Fax: +1.248.848.3701
www.concrete.org

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

This guide presents information and design criteria for shoring/
reshoring operations during the construction of reinforced and 
post-tensioned multistory buildings. Methods for developing safe 
construction practices, including sequencing and timing, as well as 
design examples, are provided. It is written for the use of formwork 
engineer/contractors and engineer/architects.
Keywords: construction loads; falsework; form removal; formwork; post-
tensioning; reshoring; shoring.
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION, p. 2
1.2—Scope, p. 2
CHAPTER 2—NOTATION AND DEFINITIONS, p. 2
2.1—Notation, p. 2
2.2—Definitions, p. 3
CHAPTER 3—SHORING/RESHORING 
CONSTRUCTION NEEDS, p. 3
3.1—Use of reshoring, p. 3
3.2—Types of forming systems, p. 3
CHAPTER 4—CONSTRUCTION LOADS ON 
FORMWORK, p. 4
4.1—Construction loads, p. 4
4.2—Load combinations, p. 4
4.3—Typical construction phases, p. 5
4.4—Construction load distribution, p. 6
4.5—Application of the simplified method, p. 6
4.6—Factors affecting the construction load distribution, 
p. 8
4.7—Post-tensioning load redistribution, p. 9
CHAPTER 5—STRENGTH OF CONCRETE SLABS 
AND FORMWORK, p. 10
5.1—Early-age concrete material strength development, 
p. 10
5.2—Construction load factors, p. 11
5.3—Early-age strength of concrete slabs, p. 11
5.4—Serviceability of concrete slabs, p. 12
5.5—Strength of formwork, p. 12
CHAPTER 6—CONSTRUCTION EXAMPLES, p. 12
6.1—Two-way slab construction, p. 12
6.2—Post-tensioned construction example, p. 18
CHAPTER 7—REFERENCES, p. 20
Authored documents, p. 21
Kenneth L. Berndt, Chair Matthew J. Poisel, Secretary
ACI 347 .2R-17
Guide for Shoring/Reshoring of Concrete Multistory 
Buildings
Reported by ACI Committee 347
Rodney D. Adams
Mary Bordner-Tanck
George Charitou
Eamonn F. Connolly
James N. Cornell II
Jack L. David
Aubrey L. Dunham
Jeffrey C. Erson
Noel J. Gardner
Brian J. Golanowski
Timothy P. Hayes
Gardner P. Horst
Jeffery C. Jack
David W. Johnston
Roger S. Johnston
Robert G. Kent
Kevin R. Koogle
Jim E. Kretz
H. S. Lew
Robert G. McCracken
Eric S. Peterson
Steffen Pippig
Douglas J. Schoonover
Aviad Shapira
John M. Simpson
Rolf A. Spahr
Pericles C. Stivaros
Daniel B. Toon
Ralph H. Tulis
ACI Committee Reports, Guides, and Commentaries are 
intended for guidance in planning, designing, executing, and 
inspecting construction. This document is intended for the use 
of individuals who are competent to evaluate the significance 
and limitations of its content and recommendations and who 
will accept responsibility for the application of the material it 
contains. The American Concrete Institute disclaims any and 
all responsibility for the stated principles. The Institute shall 
not be liable for any loss or damage arising therefrom.
Reference to this document shall not be made in contract 
documents. If items found in this document are desired by 
the Architect/Engineer to be a part of the contract documents, 
they shall be restated in mandatory language for incorporation 
by the Architect/Engineer.
ACI 347.2R-17 supersedes ACI 347.2R-05 and was adopted and published January 
2017.
Copyright © 2017, American Concrete Institute.
All rights reserved including rights of reproduction and use in any form or by 
any means, including the making of copies by any photo process, or by electronic 
or mechanical device, printed, written, or oral, or recording for sound or visual 
reproduction or for use in any knowledge or retrieval system or device, unless 
permission in writing is obtained from the copyright proprietors.
1

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION
In multistory cast-in-place concrete building construction, 
freshly cast floors are placed on formwork that is tempo -
rarily supported by a system of shores and reshores until the 
concrete has the ability to be self-supporting. Construction 
loads imposed by the shoring system can be greater than the 
permanent structure service load on a single floor. Construc-
tion loads can also be applied in a manner that differs from 
the design intent of the completed structure. Furthermore, 
the concrete of the supporting slabs has to attain suffi-
cient strength, considering that the capacities of the floors 
below vary depending on concrete age, ambient conditions 
following placement, and the rate of strength development 
properties of the slabs. As a result, it is critical to determine 
the early-age load capacity of the floor slabs, including 
punching shear strength, to avoid the possibility of partial or 
total failure of the structural system. To reduce the construc-
tion load on the floor immediately below and distribute it to 
several lower floors or to the ground, it is necessary to add 
reshores. Therefore, an engineering analysis that considers 
both the construction load distribution and the early-age 
load-carrying capacity of the concrete slabs should be 
performed before shoring/reshoring operations begin.
Formwork failures and failures caused by improper 
reshoring or premature removal of supports and inadequate 
lateral bracing have periodically occurred throughout the 
history of concrete construction. Premature removal of 
shores and reshores prior to concrete slabs achieving the 
necessary strength can contribute to construction failures or 
defects such as permanent deflections (sagging) or cracking 
in the completed structure in excess of those anticipated by 
the design. Also, if overloaded prematurely, time-dependent 
deflections under load (creep) will be larger than predicted 
by the design and may be more noticeable and objectionable.
The schedule and process for removal of forms, shores, 
and reshores should be based on an analysis of the structural 
effects. Except for the simplified method described in ACI 
347R and ACI SP-4, there is no method universally accepted 
as the proper analysis of the distribution of construction 
loads to the floor slabs and the shoring system.
To ensure structural performance and safety during 
construction, a thorough understanding of construction 
loads applied to the slabs at early ages is necessary. Equally 
important is knowledge of the behavior and the strength of 
early-age concrete members that support their own weight 
and construction loads.
For guidance in formwork operations, the formwork 
engineer/contractor can refer to several codes, standards, or 
guides, including ACI 347R, ACI 318, ACI 301, ACI SP-4, 
ANSI/ASSE A10.9, OSHA 29 CFR 1926, and ASCE/SEI 
37. These documents provide basic guidelines for general 
formwork operations.
Other documents that can provide formwork design 
requirements or guidelines include state and local building 
codes, and guidelines prepared by contractors, formwork 
manufacturers, and other construction agencies governing 
construction practices.
1.2—Scope
Although the aforementioned documents provide basic 
guidelines for general formwork operations, there are no 
codes or standards that provide detailed design and construc-
tion requirements specifically for shoring/reshoring opera-
tions for multistory reinforced and post-tensioned concrete 
construction. Investigations for usable procedures to estab-
lish safe and cost-effective shoring/reshoring operations 
have been ongoing for several decades. These investigations 
focus on two major areas: 1) determining the distribution 
of loads carried by the concrete structure during construc-
tion; and 2) estimating the ability of the concrete members 
to resist construction loads.
This guide outlines the importance of appropriate shoring/
reshoring design for multistory structures and provides basic 
requirements for safe construction. ACI SP-4 serves as an 
expanded commentary to ACI 347R and provides detailed 
information related to formwork practices, including a 
discussion of shoring/reshoring procedures and analysis 
examples. Contract documents or the authority having juris-
diction may require the contractors to supply to the building 
official, upon request, the structural analysis and concrete 
strength requirements used in planning and implementing 
shoring/reshoring operations. Such data and information 
should be furnished to the engineer/architect who should 
evaluate the effects of construction loads on the immediate 
and long-term deflections. The contractors and formwork 
designers should acquire an understanding of the construc-
tion loads and the structural behavior of the buildings during 
construction. This understanding enables them to develop a 
rational shoring/reshoring system design that is economical 
without compromising safety, quality, and serviceability.
The objective of this guide is to present practical guide-
lines for the design of shoring/reshoring operations. This 
guide provides tools to design and evaluate construction 
schedules for shoring/reshoring of multistory reinforced and 
post-tensioned concrete structures.
CHAPTER 2—NOTATION AND DEFINITIONS
2.1—Notation
b
o = perimeter of critical section for shear in slabs, in. 
(mm)
D = design dead load, lb/ft
2 (kPa)
Dc = construction dead load, lb/ft2 (kPa)
d = distance from extreme compression fiber to centroid 
of longitudinal tension reinforcement, in. (mm)
E
w = reference design value for modulus of elasticity of 
wood, psi (MPa)
F
c = reference design value for compression parallel to 
grain of wood, psi (MPa)
f
c = compressive strength of concrete, psi (MPa)
fc′ = specified compressive strength of concrete, psi 
(MPa)
K = resulting coefficient of the governing punching 
shear equations from ACI 318 that is a function of 
column and slab geometry
L = design live load, lb/ft
2 (kPa)
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
2 GUIDE FOR SHORING/RESHORING OF CONCRETE MULTISTORY BUILDINGS (ACI 347 .2R-17)

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====

Lc = construction live load, lb/ft2 (kPa)
n = elevated slab number
R28 = nominal flexural strength at 28 days, lb/ft2 (kPa)
Rc = early-age nominal flexural strength, lb/ft2 (kPa)
U28 = design factored load, lb/ft2 (kPa)
Uc = construction factored load, lb/ft2 (kPa)
Vc = nominal shear strength provided by concrete, lb (N)
Vu = factored shear force, lb (N)
Vuc = factored construction shear force, lb (N)
βc = ratio of the early-age concrete compressive strength 
to 28-day specified strength, βc < 1.0
λ = modification factor to reflect the reduced mechan -
ical properties of lightweight concrete relative to 
normalweight concrete of the same compressive 
strength
ϕ = strength reduction factor
2.2—Definitions
ACI provides a comprehensive list of definitions through 
an online resource, “ACI Concrete Terminology,” https://
www.concrete.org/store/productdetail.aspx?ItemID=CT16. 
The definitions provided herein complement that source.
backshores—shores placed snugly under a concrete slab 
or structural member after the original formwork and shores 
have been removed from a small area without allowing the 
entire slab or member to deflect or support its own mass or 
existing construction loads.
drop-head shore—shore with a head where part of the 
head can be lowered to allow removal of horizontal forming 
components without removing the shore or changing its 
vertical support for the floor system.
engineer/architect—engineer, architect, engineering 
firm, architectural firm, or other agency issuing project plans 
and specifications for the permanent structure, administering 
the work under contract documents, or both.
formwork engineer/contractor —engineer of the form-
work system or contractor in charge of designated aspects of 
formwork design and formwork operations.
preshores—added shores placed snugly under selected 
panels of a deck forming system before any primary (orig-
inal) shores are removed.
reshores—shores placed snugly under a stripped concrete 
slab or other structural member after the original forms and 
shores have been removed from a full bay, requiring the 
new slab or structural member to deflect and support its own 
weight and construction loads applied before installation of 
the reshores.
shore—vertical or inclined support member or braced 
frame designed to carry the weight of the formwork, 
concrete, and construction loads.
CHAPTER 3—SHORING/RESHORING 
CONSTRUCTION NEEDS
3.1—Use of reshoring
In multistory cast-in-place construction, rapid reuse of 
form material and shores is desired to allow other trades 
to follow concreting operations as closely as possible. The 
shores that support the newly placed concrete, formwork, 
and construction live load transmit those loads to the recently 
completed floor below, which usually exceeds that floor 
slab’s load capacity if it is the only source of support. For 
this reason, shoring or reshoring is provided over a number 
of floors to distribute the construction load to several floor 
levels below.
Stripping formwork is usually more economical if all the 
form material is removed at the same time before placing 
reshores. In this case, the structural system is required to 
support its own weight, thus reducing the load in the reshores. 
A combination of shores and reshores usually requires fewer 
levels of interconnected slabs, thus freeing more areas for 
other trades. If prefabricated drop-head shores are used, the 
shores can become the reshores if a large area of shoring is 
unloaded, permitting the structural members to deflect and 
support their own weight. The drop-head shore has a head 
that can be lowered to remove forming components without 
removing the shore or changing its support for the floor 
system. Later, the shore may be retracted and resnugged to 
act as a reshore. If the load is not relieved, then they become 
backshores.
Backshoring and preshoring are other methods of 
supporting new construction that are less widely used and 
involve leaving the original shores in place or replacing 
them in a small area at a time so as not to allow the slab 
to deflect and carry its own weight. These methods require 
careful supervision by the formwork engineer/contractor 
and review by the engineer/architect to ensure excessive slab 
and shore loads do not develop.
3.2—Types of forming systems
An important consideration in multistory cast-in-place 
concrete building construction is the type of forming system 
being used. Selecting the forming system for constructing 
a cast-in-place concrete structure is a critical decision that 
affects both the construction schedule and cost. Systems 
vary from traditional wood post-and-beam formwork/
shoring to prefabricated systems that involve sophisticated 
engineering, materials, and equipment.
There are several prefabricated forming/shoring systems 
that are used to support concrete slabs during construction, 
including the four discussed in this guide: 1) shoring-based; 
2) flying truss; 3) column-mounted; and 4) tunnel-forming 
systems. The following description of these systems is 
adapted from Jensen (1986).
3.2.1 Shoring-based systems—Deck (slab) forms are 
supported on shores placed on the slab below. The shores may 
be single posts of wood or metal or assembled from frames. 
Job-built deck forms usually consist of wood or aluminum 
stringers and joists (runners) with the deck surface made of 
plywood, supported on single-post or frame-type shoring. 
These forms are sometimes made up in larger panels tied or 
ganged together as tables with attached frame-type shoring 
for movement by crane. Deck forms may also be assembled 
on the job from proprietary panels framed in wood, steel, 
or aluminum, sometimes with their own proprietary shoring 
systems. Some of these systems allow removal of the slab 
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
 GUIDE FOR SHORING/RESHORING OF CONCRETE MULTISTORY BUILDINGS (ACI 347 .2R-17) 3