

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

The attached excerpted resource materials have been made available for use 
within ACI University.   
 
To obtain a full version of this document, please visit the ACI Store.  
 
For additional education products, please visit ACI University.

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

Objectives of safety, quality, and economy are given priority in these 
guidelines for formwork. A section on contract documents explains 
the kind and amount of specification guidance the engineer/
architect should provide for the contractor. The remainder of the 
guide advises the formwork engineer/contractor on the best ways 
to meet the specification requirements safely and economically. 
Separate chapters deal with design, construction, and materials 
for formwork. Considerations specific to architectural concrete 
are also outlined in a separate chapter. Other sections are devoted 
to formwork for bridges, shells, mass concrete, and underground 
work. The concluding chapter on formwork for special methods of 
construction includes slipforming, preplaced-aggregate concrete, 
tremie concrete, precast concrete, and prestressed concrete.
Keywords: anchors; architectural concrete; coatings; construction; 
construction loads; contract documents; falsework; form ties; forms; form-
work; foundations; quality control; reshoring; shoring; slipform construc-
tion; specifications; tolerances.
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION AND SCOPE, p. 2
1.1—Introduction, p. 2
1.2—Scope, p. 2
CHAPTER 2—NOTATION AND DEFINITIONS, p. 2
2.1—Notation, p. 2
2.2—Definitions, p. 2
CHAPTER 3—GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS, p. 3
3.1—Achieving economy in formwork, p. 3
3.2—Contract documents, p. 4
CHAPTER 4—DESIGN, p. 5
4.1—General, p. 5
4.2—Loads, p. 6
4.3—Member capacities, p. 9
4.4—Safety factors for accessories, p. 9
4.5—Shores, p. 10
4.6—Bracing and lacing, p. 10
4.7—Foundations for formwork, p. 10
4.8—Settlement, p. 10
CHAPTER 5—CONSTRUCTION, p. 10
5.1—Safety precautions, p. 10
5.2—Construction practices and workmanship, p. 12
5.3—Tolerances, p. 13
5.4—Irregularities in formed surfaces, p. 14
5.5—Shoring and centering, p. 14
5.6—Inspection and adjustment of formwork, p. 14
5.7—Removal of forms and supports, p. 15
5.8—Shoring and reshoring of multistory structures, p. 17
Kenneth L. Berndt, Chair
ACI 347R-14
Guide to Formwork for Concrete
Reported by ACI Committee 347
Rodney D. Adams
Mary Bordner-Tanck
George Charitou
Eamonn F. Connolly
James N. Cornell II
Jack L. David
Aubrey L. Dunham
Jeffrey C. Erson
Noel J. Gardner
Brian J. Golanowski
Timothy P. Hayes
Gardner P. Horst
Jeffery C. Jack
David W. Johnston
Roger S. Johnston
Robert G. Kent
Kevin R. Koogle
Jim E. Kretz
H. S. Lew
Robert G. McCracken
Eric S. Peterson
Steffen Pippig
Matthew J. Poisel
Douglas J. Schoonover
Aviad Shapira
John M. Simpson
Rolf A. Spahr
Pericles C. Stivaros
Daniel B. Toon
Ralph H. Tulis
Consulting Members
Samuel A. Greenberg
R. Kirk Gregory
ACI Committee Reports, Guides, and Commentaries are 
intended for guidance in planning, designing, executing, and 
inspecting construction. This document is intended for the use 
of individuals who are competent to evaluate the significance 
and limitations of its content and recommendations and who 
will accept responsibility for the application of the material it 
contains. The American Concrete Institute disclaims any and 
all responsibility for the stated principles. The Institute shall 
not be liable for any loss or damage arising therefrom.
Reference to this document shall not be made in contract 
documents. If items found in this document are desired by 
the Architect/Engineer to be a part of the contract documents, 
they shall be restated in mandatory language for incorporation 
by the Architect/Engineer.
ACI 347R-14 supesedes ACI 347-04 and was adopted and published July 2014.
Copyright © 2014, American Concrete Institute.
All rights reserved including rights of reproduction and use in any form or by any 
means, including the making of copies by any photo process, or by electronic or 
mechanical device, printed, written, or oral, or recording for sound or visual reproduc-
tion or for use in any knowledge or retrieval system or device, unless permission in 
writing is obtained from the copyright proprietors.
ACI 347R-14, Chapter 1-4, has been excerpted for 
use with the ACI Online CEU Program.
1

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

CHAPTER 6—MATERIALS, p. 18
6.1—General, p. 18
6.2—Properties of materials, p. 19
6.3—Accessories, p. 19
6.4—Form coatings and release agents, p. 21
CHAPTER 7—ARCHITECTURAL CONCRETE, p. 21
7.1—Introduction, p. 21
7.2—Role of architect, p. 21
7.3—Materials and accessories, p. 23
7.4—Design, p. 23
7.5—Construction, p. 24
7.6—Form removal, p. 25
CHAPTER 8—SPECIAL STRUCTURES, p. 25
8.1—Discussion, p. 25
8.2—Bridges and viaducts, including high piers, p. 25
8.3—Structures designed for composite action, p. 25
8.4—Folded plates, thin shells, and long-span roof struc-
tures, p. 26
8.5—Mass concrete structures, p. 27
8.6—Underground structures, p. 28
CHAPTER 9—SPECIAL METHODS OF 
CONSTRUCTION, p. 29
9.1—Preplaced-aggregate concrete, p. 29
9.2—Slipforms, p. 29
9.3—Permanent forms, p. 31
9.4—Forms for prestressed concrete construction, p. 32
9.5—Forms for site precasting, p. 32
9.6—Use of precast concrete for forms, p. 33
9.7—Forms for concrete placed under water, p. 33
CHAPTER 10—REFERENCES, p. 34
Authored references, p. 35
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION AND SCOPE
1.1—Introduction
Many individuals, firms, and companies are usually 
involved in the design of the facility to be built and in the 
design and construction of the formwork. The facility team 
typically involves structural engineers and architects who 
determine the requirements for the concrete structure to be 
built. For simplicity, the facility design team will usually 
be referred to as the engineer/architect, although they may 
be referred to separately in some situations. The form-
work team may include the general contractor, formwork 
specialty subcontractors, formwork engineers, form manu-
facturers, and form suppliers. The participating companies 
and firms also have form designers and skilled workers 
executing many detailed tasks. For simplicity, the formwork 
team will usually be referred to as the formwork engineer/
contractor, although they may be referred to separately in 
some situations.
This guide is based on the premise that layout, design, 
and construction of formwork should be the responsibility 
of the formwork engineer/contractor. This is believed to be 
fundamental to the achievement of safety and economy of 
formwork and of the required formed surface quality of the 
concrete.
The paired values stated in inch-pound and SI units are 
usually not exact equivalents. Therefore, each system is to 
be used independently of the other.
1.2—Scope
This guide covers:
a) A listing of information to be included in the contract 
documents
b) Design criteria for horizontal and vertical loads on 
formwork
c) Design considerations, including safety factors for 
determining the capacities of formwork accessories
d) Preparation of formwork drawings
e) Construction and use of formwork, including safety 
considerations
f) Materials for formwork
g) Formwork for special structures
h) Formwork for special methods of construction
CHAPTER 2—NOTATION AND DEFINITIONS
2.1—Notation
C
CP =  concrete lateral pressure, lb/ft2 (kPa)
Cc =  chemistry coefficient
Cw =  unit weight coefficient
c1 =  slipform vibration factor , lb/ft2 (kPa)
g
 =
 gravitational constant, 0.00981 kN/kg
h
 =
 depth 
of fluid or plastic concrete from top of place-
ment to point of consideration in form, ft (m)
R
 =
 rate of placement, ft/h (m/h)
T
 =
 temperature 
of concrete at time of placement, °F 
(°C)
w
 =
 unit weight of concrete, lb/ft3
ρ =  density of concrete, kg/m3
2.2—Definitions
The 2014 ACI Concrete Terminology (http://www.
concrete.org/Tools/ConcreteTerminology.aspx) provides a 
comprehensive list of definitions. The definitions provided 
herein complement that source.
backshores—shores left in place or shores placed snugly 
under a concrete slab or structural member after the original 
formwork and shores have been removed from a small area, 
without allowing the entire slab or member to deflect or 
support its self-weight and construction loads.
brace—structural member used to provide lateral support 
for another member, generally for the purpose of ensuring 
stability or resisting lateral loads.
centering—falsework used in the construction of arches, 
shells, space structures, or any continuous structure where 
the entire falsework is lowered (struck or decentered) as a 
unit.
climbing form—form that is raised vertically for 
succeeding lifts of concrete in a given structure.
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
2 GUIDE TO FORMWORK FOR CONCRETE (ACI 347R-14)

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

drop-head shore—shore with a head that can be lowered 
to remove forming components without removing the shore 
or changing its support for the floor system.
engineer/architect—the engineer, architect, engineering 
firm, architectural firm, or other agency issuing project plans 
and specifications for the permanent structure, administering 
the work under contract documents, or both.
falsework—temporary structure erected to support work 
in the process of construction; composed of shoring or 
vertical posting and lateral bracing for formwork for beams 
and slabs.
flying forms—large, prefabricated, mechanically handled 
sections of floor system formwork designed for multiple 
reuse; frequently including supporting truss, beam, or 
shoring assemblies completely unitized.
form—temporary structure or mold for the support of 
concrete while it is setting and gaining sufficient strength to 
be self-supporting.
formwork—total system of support for freshly placed 
concrete, including the mold or sheathing that contacts the 
concrete as well as supporting members, hardware, and 
necessary bracing.
formwork engineer/contractor —engineer of the form-
work system or contractor in charge of designated aspects of 
formwork design and formwork operations.
ganged forms—large mechanically hoisted assemblies 
with special lifting hardware used for forming vertical 
surfaces; also called “gang forms”.
horizontal lacing—horizontal bracing members attached 
to shores to reduce their unsupported length, thereby 
increasing load capacity and stability.
preshores—added shores placed snugly under selected 
panels of a deck-forming system before any primary (orig-
inal) shores are removed.
reshores—shores placed snugly under a stripped concrete 
slab or other structural member after the original forms and 
shores have been removed from a full bay, requiring the 
new slab or structural member to deflect and support its own 
weight and existing construction loads to be applied before 
installation of the reshores.
scaffold—temporary structure with an elevated platform 
for supporting workers, tools, and materials.
shore—vertical or inclined support member or braced 
frame designed to carry the weight of the formwork, 
concrete, and construction loads.
slipform—a form that is pulled or raised as concrete is 
placed.
surface air voids—small regular or irregular cavities, 
usually not exceeding 0.6 in. (15 mm) in diameter, resulting 
from entrapment of air bubbles in the surface of formed 
concrete during placement and consolidation.
CHAPTER 3—GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
3.1—Achieving economy in formwork
The engineer/architect can improve the overall economy 
of the structure by planning so that formwork costs are mini-
mized. The cost of formwork can be greater than half the 
total cost of the concrete structure. This investment requires 
careful thought and planning by the engineer/architect when 
designing and specifying the structure and by the formwork 
engineer/contractor when designing and constructing the 
formwork. Formwork drawings, prepared by the formwork 
engineer/contractor, can identify potential problems and 
should give project site employees a clear picture of what is 
required and how to achieve it.
The following guidelines show how the engineer/architect 
can plan the structure so that formwork economy may best 
be achieved:
a) To simplify and permit maximum reuse of formwork, 
the dimensions of footings, columns, and beams should 
be of standard material multiples, and the number of sizes 
should be minimized.
b) When interior columns are the same width as or smaller 
than the girders they support, the column form becomes a 
simple rectangular or square box without boxouts, and the 
slab form does not have to be cut out at each corner of the 
column.
c) When all beams are made one depth (beams framing 
into girders as well as beams framing into columns), the 
supporting structures for the beam forms can be carried on a 
level platform supported on shores.
d) Considering available sizes of dressed lumber, 
plywood, and other ready-made formwork components and 
keeping beam and joist sizes constant will reduce labor cost 
and improve material use.
e) The design of the structure should be based on the use 
of one standard depth wherever possible when commercially 
available forming systems, such as one- or two-way joist 
systems, are used.
f) The structural design should be prepared simultane -
ously with the architectural design so that dimensions can 
be better coordinated. Minor changes in plan dimensions to 
better fit formwork layout can result in significant reductions 
in formwork costs.
g) The engineer/architect should consider architectural 
features, depressions, and openings for mechanical or elec -
trical work when detailing the structural system, with the aim 
of achieving economy. Variations in the structural system 
caused by such items should be shown on the structural 
plans. Wherever possible, depressions in the tops of slabs 
should be made without a corresponding break in elevations 
of the soffits of slabs, beams, or joists.
h) Embedments for attachment to or penetration through 
the concrete structure should be designed to minimize 
random penetration of the formed surface.
i) Avoid locating columns or walls, even for a few floors, 
where they would interfere with the use of large formwork 
shoring units in otherwise clear bays.
j) Post-tensioning sequences should be carried out in 
stages and planned in a way that will minimize the need for 
additional shoring that may be required due to redistribution 
of post-tensioning loads.
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
 GUIDE TO FORMWORK FOR CONCRETE (ACI 347R-14)  3

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====

3.2—Contract documents
The contract documents should set forth the tolerances 
required in the finished structure but should not attempt to 
specify the means and methods by which the formwork engi-
neer/contractor designs and builds the formwork to achieve 
the required tolerances.
The layout and design of the formwork should be a 
joint effort of the formwork engineer and the formwork 
contractor. The formwork construction in compliance with 
the formwork design is the responsibility of the formwork 
contractor. When formwork design is not by the contractor, 
formwork design is the responsibility of the formwork 
engineer. This approach gives the necessary freedom to 
use skill, knowledge, and innovation to safely construct an 
economical structure. By reviewing the formwork drawings, 
the engineer/architect can understand how the formwork 
engineer/contractor has interpreted the contract documents. 
Some local jursidictions have legal requirements defining 
the specific responsibilities of the engineer/architect in 
formwork design, review, or approval.
3.2.1 Individual specifications—The specification for 
formwork will affect the overall economy and quality of the 
finished work; therefore, it should be tailored for each partic-
ular job, clearly indicate what is expected of the contractor, 
and ensure economy and safety.
A well-written formwork specification tends to equalize 
bids for the work. Vague or overly restrictive requirements 
can make it difficult for bidders to understand exactly what 
is expected. Bidders can be overly cautious and overbid or 
misinterpret requirements and underbid. Using standard 
specifications such as ACI 301 that have many input sources 
in development can mitigate these possible problems.
A well-written formwork specification is of value not only 
to the owner and the contractor, but also to the field repre-
sentative of the engineer/architect, approving agency, and 
the subcontractors of other trades. Some requirements can 
be written to allow discretion of the contractor where quality 
of finished concrete work would not be impaired by the use 
of alternative materials and methods.
Consideration of the applicable general requirements 
suggested herein are not intended to represent a complete 
specification. Requirements should be added for actual 
materials, finishes, and other items peculiar to and neces-
sary for the individual structure. The engineer/architect can 
exclude, call special attention to, strengthen, or make more 
lenient any general requirement to best fit the needs of the 
particular project. Further detailed information is given in 
ACI SP-4.
3.2.2 Formwork materials and accessories—If the partic-
ular design or desired finish requires special attention, the 
engineer/architect can specify in the contract documents 
the formwork materials and any other feature necessary to 
attain the objectives. If the engineer/architect does not call 
for specific materials or accessories, the formwork engineer/
contractor can choose any materials that meet the contract 
requirements.
When structural design is based on the use of commer -
cially available form units in standard sizes, such as one- or 
two-way joist systems, plans should be drawn to make use 
of available shapes and sizes. Some variation from normal 
tolerances should be permitted by the specification: a) for 
connections of form units to other framing; and b) to reflect 
normal installation practices and typical used condition of 
the form type anticipated.
3.2.3 Finish of exposed concrete—Finish requirements for 
concrete surfaces should be described in measurable terms 
as precisely as practicable. Refer to 5.4, Chapter 7, and ACI 
347.3R.
3.2.4 Design, inspection, review, and approval of form-
work—Although the safety of formwork is the responsibility 
of the contractor, the engineer/architect or approving agency 
may, under certain circumstances, decide to review and 
approve the formwork, including drawings and calculations. 
If so, the engineer/architect should call for such review or 
approval in the contract documents.
Approval might be required for unusually complicated 
structures, structures whose designs were based on a partic -
ular method of construction, structures in which the forms 
impart a desired architectural finish, certain post-tensioned 
structures, folded plates, thin shells, or long-span roof 
structures.
The following items should be clarified in the contract 
documents:
a) Who will design the formwork
b) Who will determine post-tensioning sequence and 
support needed for redistribution of loads resulting from 
stressing operations
c) Who will design shoring and the reshoring system
d) Who will inspect the specific feature of formwork and 
when will the inspection be performed
e) What reviews, approvals, or both, will be required for:
i. Formwork drawings, calculations, or both
ii. Post-tensioning support
iii. Reshoring design
iv. Formwork preplacement inspection
f) Who will give such reviews, approvals, or both.
3.2.5 Contract documents—The contract documents 
should include all information about the structure neces-
sary for the formwork engineer to design the formwork and 
prepare formwork drawings and for the formwork contractor 
to build the formwork such as:
a) Number, location, and details of all construction joints, 
contraction joints, and expansion joints that will be required 
for the particular job or parts of it
b) Sequence of concrete placement, if critical (examples 
include pour strips and hanging floors)
c) Tolerances for concrete construction
d) The live load and superimposed dead load for which the 
structure is designed and any live-load reduction used
e) Intermediate supports under stay-in-place forms, such 
as metal deck used for forms and permanent forms of other 
materials supports, bracing, or both, required by the struc-
tural engineer’s design for composite action; and any other 
special supports
f) The location and order of erection and removal of shores 
for composite construction
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
4 GUIDE TO FORMWORK FOR CONCRETE (ACI 347R-14)

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====

g) Minimum concrete strength required before removal of 
shoring and any project specific reshoring requirements
h) Special provisions essential for formwork for special 
construction methods and for special structures such as 
shells and folded plates. The basic geometry of such struc-
tures, as well as their required camber, should be given in 
sufficient detail to permit the formwork contractor to build 
the forms
i) Special requirements for post-tensioned concrete 
members. The effect of load transfer and associated move-
ments during tensioning of post-tensioned members can be 
critical, and the contractor should be advised of any special 
provisions that should be made in the formwork for this 
condition
j) Amount of required camber for slabs or other struc-
tural members to compensate for deflection of the structure. 
Measurements of camber attained should be made at the 
soffit level after initial set and before removal of formwork 
supports
k) Where chamfers are required or prohibited throughout 
the project at all element corners, such as door openings, 
window openings, beams, columns wall ends, and slab edges
l) Requirements for inserts, waterstops, built-in frames for 
openings and holes through concrete; similar requirements 
where the work of other trades will be attached to, supported 
by, or passed through formwork
m) Size and location of formed openings through a struc-
tural slab or wall should be shown on the structural drawings
n) Where architectural features, embedded items, or the 
work of other trades could change the location of structural 
members, such as joists in one- or two-way joist systems; 
such changes or conditions should be coordinated by the 
engineer/architect
o) Locations of and details for architectural concrete; 
when architectural details are to be cast into structural 
concrete, they should be so indicated or referenced on the 
structural plans because they can play a key role in the struc-
tural design of the form.
CHAPTER 4—DESIGN
4.1—General
4.1.1 Planning—All formwork should be well planned 
before construction begins. The amount of planning required 
will depend on the size, complexity, and importance (consid-
ering reuses) of the form. Formwork should be designed for 
strength and serviceability. System stability and member 
buckling should be investigated in all cases.
4.1.2 Design methods—Formwork is made of many 
different materials, and the commonly used design practices 
for each material are to be followed (refer to Chapter 6). 
For example, forms are designed by either allowable stress 
design (ASD) methods or load and resistance factor design 
(LRFD) methods. When the concrete structure becomes 
a part of the formwork support system, as in many multi -
story buildings, it is important for the formwork engineer/
contractor to recognize that the concrete structure has been 
designed by the strength design method. Accordingly, in 
communication of the loads, it should be clear whether they 
are service loads or factored loads.
Throughout this guide, the terms “design”, “design load”, 
and “design capacity” are used to refer to design of the form-
work. Where reference is made to design load for the perma-
nent structure, structural design load, structural dead load, or 
some similar term is used to refer to unfactored loads (dead 
and live loads) on the structure. Load effects on these tempo-
rary structures and their individual components should be 
determined by accepted methods of structural analysis.
4.1.3 Basic objectives—Formwork should be designed so 
that concrete slabs, walls, and other members will have the 
correct dimensions, shape, alignment, elevation, and posi-
tion within established tolerances. Formwork should also be 
designed so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral 
loads that might be applied until such loads can be supported 
by the concrete structure. Vertical and lateral loads should 
be carried to the ground by the formwork system or by the 
in-place construction that has adequate strength for that 
purpose. Responsibility for the design of the formwork rests 
with the contractor or the formwork engineer hired by the 
contractor to design and be responsible for the formwork.
4.1.4 Design deficiencies—Some design deficiencies that 
can lead to unacceptable performance or structural failure 
are:
a) Lack of allowance in design for loadings such as 
concrete pressures, wind, power buggies, placing equip-
ment, and temporary material storage
b) Inadequate design of shoring, reshoring, or backshoring
c) Inadequate provisions to prevent rotation of beam forms 
where the slabs frame into them on only one side (Fig. 4.1.4)
d) Insufficient anchorage against uplift due to battered 
form faces or vertical component of bracing force on single-
sided forms
e) Insufficient allowance for eccentric loading due to 
placement sequences
f) Failure to investigate bearing stresses between individual 
formwork elements and bearing capacity of supporting soils
g) Failure to design proper lateral bracing or lacing of 
shoring
h) Failure to investigate the slenderness ratio of compres-
sion members
i) Inadequate provisions to tie corners of intersecting 
cantilevered forms together
j) Failure to account for loads imposed on form hardware 
anchorages during closure of form panel gaps when aligning 
formwork
k) Failure to account for elastic shortening during 
post-tensioning
l) Failure to account for changing load patterns due to 
post-tensioning transfer
4.1.5 Formwork drawings and calculations—Before 
constructing forms, the formwork engineer/contractor may 
be required to submit detailed drawings, design calculations, 
or both, of proposed formwork for review and approval by 
the engineer/architect or approving agency. If such draw-
ings are not approved by the engineer/architect or approving 
agency, the formwork engineer/contractor should make such 
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
 GUIDE TO FORMWORK FOR CONCRETE (ACI 347R-14)  5

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====

changes as may be required before the start of construction 
of the formwork.
The review, approval, or both, of the formwork draw-
ings does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility 
for adequately constructing and maintaining the forms so 
that they will function properly. Design values and loading 
conditions should be shown on formwork drawings. As 
related to form use, these include formwork design values of 
construction live load, allowable vertical or lateral concrete 
pressure, maximum equipment load, required soil bearing 
capacity, material specification, camber required, and other 
pertinent information, if applicable.
In addition to specifying types of materials, sizes, lengths, 
and connection details, formwork drawings should provide 
for applicable details, such as:
a) Procedures, sequence, and criteria for removal of 
forms, shores, reshores, and backshores and for retracting 
and resnugging drophead shores to allow slab to deflect and 
support its own weight prior to casting of next level
b) Design allowance for construction loads on new slabs 
when such allowance will affect the development of shoring 
schemes, reshoring schemes, or both (refer to 4.5 and 5.8 for 
shoring and reshoring of multistory structures)
c) Anchors, form ties, shores, lateral bracing, and hori-
zontal lacing
d) Means to adjust forms for alignment and grade
e) Waterstops, keyways, and inserts
f) Working scaffolds and runways
g) Weepholes or vibrator holes, where required
h) Screeds and grade strips
i) Location of external vibrator mountings
j) Crush plates or wrecking plates where stripping can 
damage concrete
k) Removal of spreaders or temporary blocking
l) Cleanout holes and inspection openings
m) Construction joints, contraction joints, and expansion 
joints in accordance with contract documents
n) Sequence of concrete placement and minimum elapsed 
time between adjacent placements
o) Chamfer strips or grade strips for exposed corners and 
construction joints
p) Reveals (rustications)
q) Camber
r) Mudsills or other foundation provisions for formwork
s) Special provisions, such as safety, fire, drainage, and 
protection from ice and debris at water crossings
t) Special form face requirements
u) Notes to formwork erector showing size and location of 
conduits and pipes projecting through formwork
v) Temporary openings or attachments for climbing crane 
or other material handling equipment.
4.2—Loads
4.2.1 Vertical loads—Vertical loads consist of dead and 
live loads. The weight of formwork plus the weight of the 
reinforcement and freshly placed concrete is dead load. The 
live load includes the weight of the workers, equipment, 
material storage, runways, and impact.
Fig. 4.1.4—Prevention of rotation is important where slab frames into beam form on only 
one side.
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
6 GUIDE TO FORMWORK FOR CONCRETE (ACI 347R-14)

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====

Vertical loads assumed for shoring and reshoring design 
for multistory construction should include all loads trans-
mitted from the floors above as dictated by the proposed 
construction schedule (refer to 4.5).
The formwork should be designed for a live load of not 
less than 50 lb/ft
2 (2.4 kPa) of horizontal projection, except 
when reductions are allowed in accordance with ASCE/SEI 
37. When motorized carts are used, the live load should not 
be less than 75 lb/ft
2 (3.6 kPa).
The unfactored design load for combined dead and live 
loads should not be less than 100 lb/ft 2 (4.8 kPa), or 125 lb/
ft2 (6.0 kPa) if motorized carts are used.
4.2.2 Lateral pressure of concrete—The design of vertical 
formwork is determined by the lateral pressure exerted 
by the fresh concrete, which in turn is determined by the 
mobility characteristics of the concrete and the method of 
consolidating the concrete. Research (ACI Committee 622 
1957, 1958; Gardner and Ho 1979; Gardner 1980, 1981, 
1985; Clear and Harrison 1985; Johnston et al. 1989; British 
Cement Association 1992; Dunston et al. 1994; Barnes and 
Johnston 1999, 2003) has assisted in developing recommen-
dations for lateral pressures of conventional concrete.
Methods of consolidating concrete include rodding or 
spading (no longer used or recommended for large place -
ments), internal vibration, and external vibration. The inten-
sity and depth of internal vibration affect the lateral pressure 
exerted by vibrated concrete. Often, chemical admixtures 
are used in conventional concrete to facilitate consolidation.
In recent years, concrete technology has evolved with the 
use of supplemental cementitious materials and specialty 
chemical admixtures. Conventional concrete with slump 
values less than 9 in. (225 mm) are typically vibrated to 
ensure proper consolidation. With the increase in slump 
beyond 9 in. (225 mm), it is preferable to determine the 
slump flow spread of the concrete (ASTM C1611/C1611M) 
rather than slump. Concrete mixtures with slump flow spread 
between 15 and 24 in. (400 and 605 mm) may need vibration 
to consolidate satisfactorily; this depends on the placement 
conditions and characteristics of the structural element. Self-
consolidating concrete (SCC) is a class of high-performance 
concrete that can consolidate under its own mass. Such 
concrete can be placed from the top of the formwork or can 
be pumped from the base without mechanical consolidation 
(ACI 237R).
The lateral pressure of concrete in formwork can be 
represented as shown in Fig. 4.2.2. Unless the conditions of 
4.2.2.1 for conventional concrete or 4.2.2.2 for SCC are met, 
formwork should be designed for the hydrostatic pressure of 
the newly placed concrete given in Eq. (4.2.2.1a).
When working with mixtures using newly introduced 
admixtures that increase set time or increase slump char -
acteristics, Eq. (4.2.2.1a) should be used until the effect on 
formwork pressure is understood by testing, measurement, 
or both.
4.2.2.1a Inch-pound version—The lateral pressure of 
concrete, C
CP (lb/ft2), can be determined in accordance with 
the appropriate equation listed in Table 4.2.2.1a(a).
 CCP = wh (4.2.2.1a(a))
            
max
9000150CP c w
RC CC T
=+ 
 (4.2.2.1a(b))
with 
a minimum of 600Cw lb/ft2, but in no case greater than 
wh
         
CC C T
R
T
CP cwmax
,=+ +


150 43 400 2800
 
(4.2.2.1a(c))
with 
a minimum of 600Cw lb/ft2, but in no case greater than 
wh, where Cc is defined in Table 4.2.2.1a(b) and Cw is defined 
in Table 4.2.2.1a(c).
4.2.2.1b SI version— The lateral pressure of concrete, CCP 
(kPa), can be determined in accordance with the appropriate 
equation listed in Table 4.2.2.1b.
 CCP = ρgh (4.2.2.1b(a))
            
max
7857.2 17.8
CP c w
RC CC T
=+  +  
(4.2.2.1b(b))
with 
a minimum of 30C w kPa, but in no case greater than 
ρgh.
max
1156 2447.2 17.8 17.8
CP c w
RC CC TT
= ++  ++
 (4.2.2.1b(c))
with 
a minimum of 30C w kPa, but in no case greater than 
ρgh, where C c is defined in Table 4.2.2.1a(b) and Cw is 
defined in Table 4.2.2.1a(c).
Fig. 4.2.2—Concrete lateral pressure distribution.
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
 GUIDE TO FORMWORK FOR CONCRETE (ACI 347R-14)  7

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====

4.2.2.2 When working with self-consolidating concrete, 
the lateral pressure for design should be the full liquid head 
unless the effect on formwork pressure is understood by 
measurement or prior studies and experience. The lateral 
pressures developed by SCC are determined by consid-
ering the rate of concrete placement relative to the rate of 
development of concrete stiffness/strength. Any method has 
to include a measure of the stiffening characteristics of the 
SCC and should be capable of being easily checked using 
on-site measurements. Often, laboratory tests are needed as 
a precursor to on-site monitoring tests. Several methods for 
estimating lateral pressure of nonvibrated SCC have been 
proposed (Gardner et al. 2012; Khayat and Omran 2011; 
Lange et al. 2008; DIN 18218:2010-01; “DIN Standard on 
Formwork Pressures Updated” 2010; Proske and Graubner 
2008) and continue to be developed as additional data become 
available. Experience with these methods is presently some-
what limited. Thus, evaluation of estimated pressure on the 
Table 4.2.2.1b—Applicable lateral pressure equations for concrete other than SCC - SI version
Slump* Internal vibration depth Element Rate of placement Pressure equation
Greater than 175 mm Any Any Any 4.2.2.1b(a)
Less than or equal to 175 mm Greater than 1.2 m Any Any 4.2.2.1b(a)
Less than or equal to 175 mm Less than or equal to 1.2 m
Column† Any 4.2.2.1b(b)
Wall‡ less than or equal to 4.2 m tall Less than 2.1 m/h 4.2.2.1b(b)
Wall‡ greater than 4.2 m tall Less than 2.1 m/h 4.2.2.1b(c)
Wall‡ 2.1 to 4.5 m/h 4.2.2.1b(c)
Greater than 4.5 m/h 4.2.2.1b(a)
*Slump for determination of lateral pressure shall be measured after the addition of all admixtures.
†For the purpose of this document, columns are defined as vertical elements with no plan dimension exceeding 2 m.
‡For the purpose of this document, walls are defined as vertical elements with at least one plan dimension exceeding 2 m.
Table 4.2.2.1a(b)—Chemistry coefficient C c
Cement type Slag Fly ash Retarders* Cc
I, II, or III None None
None 1.0
Included 1.2
Any
Less than 70 percent Less than 40 percent
None 1.2
Included 1.4
Greater than or equal to 70 percent Greater than or equal to 40 percent
None 1.4
Included 1.5
*Retarders include any admixture, such as a retarder, retarding water reducer, retarding mid-range water-reducing admixture, or high-range water-reducing admixture, that delays 
setting of concrete.
Table 4.2.2.1a(c)—Unit weight coefficient C w
Inch-pound version SI version
Unit weight of concrete, lb/ft3 Cw Density of concrete, kg/m3 Cw
w < 140 0.5[1 + (w/145 lb/ft3)] 
but not less than 0.80 ρ < 2240 0.5[1 + (w/2320 kg/m3)]
but not less than 0.80
140 ≤ w ≤ 150 1.0 2240 ≤ ρ ≤ 2400 1.0
w > 150 w/145 lb/ft3 ρ > 2400 w/2320 kg/m3
Table 4.2.2.1a(a)—Applicable lateral pressure equations for concrete other than SCC - Inch-pound version
Slump* Internal vibration depth Element Rate of placement Pressure equation
Greater than 7 in. Any Any Any 4.2.2.1a(a)
Less than or equal to 7 in. Greater than 4 ft Any Any 4.2.2.1a(a)
Less than or equal to 7 in. Less than or equal to 4 ft
Column† Any 4.2.2.1a(b)
Wall‡ less than or equal to 14 ft tall Less than 7 ft/h 4.2.2.1a(b)
Wall‡ greater than 14 ft tall Less than 7 ft/h 4.2.2.1a(c)
Wall‡ 7 to 15 ft/h 4.2.2.1a(c)
Greater than15 ft/h 4.2.2.1a(a)
*Slump for determination of lateral pressure shall be measured after the addition of all admixtures.
†For the purpose of this document, columns are defined as vertical elements with no plan dimension exceeding 6.5 ft.
‡For the purpose of this document, walls are defined as vertical elements with at least one plan dimension exceeding 6.5 ft.
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
8 GUIDE TO FORMWORK FOR CONCRETE (ACI 347R-14)

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====

basis of more than one method is advisable until satisfactory 
performance is confirmed for the range of parameters asso-
ciated with the project. Measuring pressures during place -
ment and adjusting the rate of placement to control pres-
sures within the capacity of the forms can be a wise precau-
tion when using unproven SCC mixtures. Researchers and 
contractors have used pressure cells inserted through the 
form face and load cells on form ties with pressure based on 
tributary area as methods of measurement (Johnston 2010).
SCC placement pressures have the potential to reach full 
liquid head pressures. Generally, concrete lateral pressures 
will not reach full equivalent liquid head pressure but agita-
tion of the already-placed concrete in the form will cause 
form pressure to increase. There are site and placement 
conditions that will increase form pressure. Site conditions 
that can transmit vibrations to the freshly-placed concrete 
can cause it to lose its internal structure and reliquefy. Heavy 
equipment operating close to the forms, or continued work 
on the forms, will transmit vibration. Dropping concrete 
from the pump hose or placing bucket will also agitate the 
in-place concrete. Concrete pumped into the bottom of a 
form will always create pressures higher than full liquid 
head.
4.2.2.3 Alternatively, a method for either conventional 
or self-consolidating concrete based on appropriate exper -
imental data can be used to determine the lateral pressure 
used for form design (Gardner and Ho 1979; Gardner 1980, 
1985; Clear and Harrison 1985; British Cement Association 
1992; Dunston et al. 1994; Barnes and Johnston 1999, 
2003) or a project-specific procedure can be implemented 
to control field-measured pressures in instrumented forms 
to the maximum pressure for which the form was designed 
(Johnston 2010).
4.2.2.4 If concrete is pumped from the base of the form, 
the form should be designed for full hydrostatic head of 
concrete wh (or ρgh) plus a minimum allowance of 25 
percent for pump surge pressure. Pressures can be as high as 
the face pressure of the pump piston; thus, pressure should 
be monitored and controlled so that the design pressure is 
not exceeded.
4.2.2.5 Caution is necessary and additional allowance for 
pressure should be considered when using external vibration 
or concrete made with shrinkage-compensating or expansive 
cements. Pressures in excess of the equivalent hydrostatic 
head can occur.
4.2.2.6 For slipform lateral pressures, refer to 9.2.2.4.
4.2.3 Horizontal loads—Braces and shores should be 
designed to resist all horizontal loads such as wind, cable 
tensions, inclined supports, dumping of concrete, and 
starting and stopping of equipment. Wind loads on enclo -
sures or other wind breaks attached to the formwork should 
be considered in addition to these loads.
4.2.3.1 Formwork exposed to the elements should be 
designed for wind pressures determined in accordance with 
ASCE/SEI 7 with adjustment as provided in ASCE/SEI 37 
for shorter recurrence interval. Alternately, formwork may 
be designed for the local building code-required lateral wind 
pressure but not less than 15 lb/ft
2 (0.72 kPa). Consideration 
should be given to possible wind uplift on the formwork.
4.2.3.2 For elevated floor formwork, the applied value of 
horizontal load due to wind, dumping of concrete, inclined 
placement of concrete, and equipment acting in any direc -
tion at each floor line should produce effects not less than the 
effect of 100 lb/linear ft (1.5 kN/m) of floor edge or 2 percent 
of total dead load on the form distributed as a uniform load 
per linear foot (meter) of slab edge, whichever is greater.
4.2.3.3. For wall and column form bracing design, the 
applied value of horizontal load due to wind and eccen -
tric vertical loads should produce effects not less than the 
effect of 100 lb/linear ft (1.5 kN/m) of wall length or column 
width, applied at the top.
4.2.3.4 Formwork in hurricane-prone regions should be 
given special consideration in accordance with ASCE/SEI 
37.
4.2.4 Special loads—The formwork should be designed 
for any special conditions of construction likely to occur, 
such as unsymmetrical placement of concrete, impact of 
machine-delivered concrete, uplift from concrete pressure, 
uplift from wind, concentrated loads of reinforcement, form 
handling loads, and storage of construction materials. Form 
designers should provide for special loading conditions, such 
as walls constructed over spans of slabs or beams that exert 
a different loading pattern before hardening of concrete than 
that for which the supporting structure is designed.
Imposition of any construction loads on the partially 
completed structure should not be allowed, except as speci-
fied in formwork drawings or with the approval of the engi-
neer/architect. Refer to 5.8 for special conditions pertaining 
to multistory work.
4.2.5 Post-tensioning loads—Shores, reshores, and 
backshores need to be analyzed for both concrete place -
ment loads and for all load transfer that takes place during 
post-tensioning.
4.3—Member capacities
Member capacities for use in the design of formwork, exclu-
sive of accessories, are determined by the applicable codes 
or specifications listed in Chapter 6. When fabricated form-
work, shoring, or scaffolding units are used, manufacturer’s 
recommendations for working capacities should be followed 
if supported by engineering calculations or test reports of a 
qualified and recognized testing agency. The effects of cumu-
lative load duration should be considered in accordance with 
the applicable design specification for the material.
4.4—Safety factors for accessories
Table 4.4 shows recommended minimum factors of 
safety, based on committee and industry experience, for 
formwork accessories, such as form ties, form anchors, and 
form hangers. In selecting these accessories, the formwork 
designer should be certain that materials furnished for the 
job meet these minimum ultimate-strength safety require -
ments compared to the unfactored load. When manufactur -
er’s recommended factors of safety are greater, the manu-
facturers recommended working capacities should be used.
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
 GUIDE TO FORMWORK FOR CONCRETE (ACI 347R-14)  9

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====

4.5—Shores
Shores and reshores or backshores should be designed 
to carry all loads transmitted to them. A rational analysis 
(ACI 347.2R and ACI SP-4) should be used to determine 
the number of floors to be shored, reshored, or backshored; 
and to determine the loads transmitted to the floors, shores, 
and reshores or backshores as a result of the construction 
sequence.
The analysis should consider, but should not necessarily 
be limited to:
a) Structural design load of the slab or member including 
live load, partition loads, and other loads for which the engi-
neer of the permanent structure designed the slab. Where 
the engineer included a reduced live load for the design of 
certain members and allowances for construction loads, such 
values should be shown on the structural plans and be taken 
into consideration when performing this analysis.
b) Dead load weight of the concrete and formwork
c) Construction live loads, such as the placing crews and 
equipment or stored materials
d) Specified design strength of concrete
e) Cycle time between the placement of successive floors
f) Strength of concrete at the time it is required to support 
shoring loads from above
g) The distribution of loads between floors, shores, and 
reshores or backshores at the time of placing concrete, strip-
ping formwork, and removal of reshoring or backshoring 
(Grundy and Kabaila 1963; Agarwal and Gardner 1974; 
Stivaros and Halvorsen 1990)
h) Span of slab or structural member between permanent 
supports
i) Type of formwork systems, that is, span of horizontal 
formwork components and individual shore loads
j) Minimum age of concrete when creep deflection is a 
concern
k) Loads applied due to post-tensioning transfer
Commercially available load cells can be placed under 
selected shores to monitor actual shore loads to guide the 
shoring and reshoring during construction (Noble 1975).
Field-constructed butt or lap splices of timber shoring 
are not recommended unless they are made with fabricated 
hardware devices of demonstrated strength and stability. If 
plywood or lumber splices are made for timber shoring, they 
should be designed to prevent buckling and bending of the 
shoring.
Before construction, an overall plan for scheduling of 
shoring and reshoring or backshoring, and calculation of 
loads transferred to the structure, should be prepared by a 
qualified and experienced formwork designer. The struc-
ture’s capacity to carry these loads should be reviewed or 
approved by the engineer/architect. The plan and responsi-
bility for its execution remain with the contractor.
4.6—Bracing and lacing
The formwork system should be designed to transfer all 
horizontal loads to the ground or to completed construction 
in such a manner as to ensure safety at all times. Diagonal 
bracing should be provided in vertical and horizontal 
planes where required to resist lateral loads and to prevent 
instability of individual members. Horizontal lacing can 
be considered in design to hold in place and increase the 
buckling strength of individual shores and reshores or back-
shores. Lacing should be provided in whatever directions are 
necessary to produce the correct slenderness ratio l/r for the 
load supported, where l is the unsupported length and r is 
the least radius of gyration. The braced system should be 
anchored to ensure stability of the total system.
4.7—Foundations for formwork
Proper foundations on ground, such as mudsills, spread 
footings, or pile footings, should be provided. Formwork 
footings and bracing anchors should be designed to resist the 
loads imposed without exceeding the allowable soil bearing 
capacity, without incurring excessive settlements affecting 
the formwork structural integrity and stability, and without 
deviating from the specified concrete elevation. If soil under 
mudsills is or may become incapable of supporting super -
imposed loads without appreciable settlement, it should be 
stabilized or other means of support should be provided. 
Mudsills should be protected from loss of soil bearing 
strength. Causes might include scour due to running water, 
nearby excavations, or the increase of moisture content 
caused by the supporting soil becoming wet or saturated. No 
concrete should be placed on formwork supported on frozen 
ground.
4.8—Settlement
Formwork should be designed and constructed so that 
vertical adjustments can be made to compensate for antici -
pated take-up, elastic deformations, and settlements.
CHAPTER 5—CONSTRUCTION
5.1—Safety precautions
Formwork engineers and formwork contractors should 
follow all state, local, and federal codes, ordinances, and 
regulations pertaining to forming and shoring. In addition to 
Table 4.4—Minimum safety factors of formwork 
accessories
Accessory
Safety 
factor* Type of construction†
Form tie 2.0 All applications
Form anchor
2.0
3.0
Formwork anchors supporting form weight, 
concrete pressures and wind load only
Formwork anchors supporting form weight, 
concrete pressures, wind loads, construction 
personnel live loads, and impact
Form 
hangers
2.0 All applications
Anchoring 
inserts used 
as form ties
2.0 Precast-concrete panels when used as 
formwork
*Safety factors are based on the ultimate strength of the accessory when new.
†Higher factors of safety are required by OSHA 1926 for work platform accessories.
To purchase a complete copy of ACI 347R-14,
please visit the ACI Bookstore
American Concrete Institute – Copyrighted © Material – www.concrete.org
10 GUIDE TO FORMWORK FOR CONCRETE (ACI 347R-14)