

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

Fédération Internationale des Ingénieurs-Conseils
International Federation of Consulting Engineers
Internationale Vereinigung Beratender Ingenieure
Federación Internacional de Ingenieros Consultores
Conditions of Contract for
Construction 
       
FOR BUILDING AND ENGINEERING WORKS DESIGNED BY THE EMPLOYER
GENERAL CONDITIONS
PARTICULAR CONDITIONS
SAMPLE FORMS
ISBN 2 – 88432 – 022 – 9                                                                         FIRST EDITION 1999
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES INGENIEURS-CONSEILS
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF CONSULTING ENGINEERS
INTERNATIONALE VEREINIGUNG BERATENDER INGENIEURE
FEDERACION INTERNACIONAL DE INGENIEROS CONSOLTORES
GENERAL CONDITIONS
GUIDANCE FOR THE
PREPARATION OF
PARTICULAR CONDITIONS
FORMS OF LETTER OF
TENDER, CONTRACT
AGREEMENT AND 
DISPUTE AD
JUDICATION
AGREEMENT
Conditions of Contract
for CONSTRUCTION
FOR BUILDING AND ENGINEERING WORKS
DESIGNED BY THE EMPLOYER
First Edition 1999
ISBN 2-88432-022-9 
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

ERRATA to the First Edition, 1999
The following significant errata are corrected in this reprinting of the First Edition of the
Construction Contract. Several minor typographical errors and layout irregularities
have also been corrected.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Foreword In figure “Typical sequence of Payment Events envisaged in Clause 14”,
change “14.11 Contractor issues Final Statement ...” to “Contractor
submits Final Statement ...”.
Page 2 In the middle of the third line of Sub-Clause 1.1.2.9, delete “under”.
Page 26 In the title of Sub-Clause 8.1, substitute “Works” for “Work”.
Page 56 In the penultimate line, delete the parentheses “(“ and “)”.
Page 60 Sub-Clause 20.3, in the line following sub-paragraph (d), delete
“Particular Conditions” and substitute “Appendix to Tender”.
Page 68 In the third line of Clause 9, delete the two words “notice to”.
GUIDANCE FOR THE PREPARATION OF PARTICULAR CONDITIONS
Page 14 Under Sub-Clause 14.9, delete “EXEMPTION” and substitute
“RETENTION”.
Annexes Delete “ © FIDIC”.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Fédération Internationale des Ingénieurs-Conseils (FIDIC) extends special
thanks to the following members of its Update Task Group:  Christopher Wade
(Group Leader), SWECO-VBB, Sweden; Peter L Booen (Principal Drafter),
GIBB Ltd, UK; Hermann Bayerlein, Fichtner, Germany; Christopher R Seppala
(Legal Adviser), White & Case, France; and José F Speziale, IATASA, Argentina.
The preparation was carried out under the general direction of the FIDIC
Contracts Committee which comprised John B Bowcock, Consulting
Engineer, UK (Chairman); Michael Mortimer-Hawkins, SwedPower, Sweden;
and Axel-Volkmar Jaeger, Schmidt Reuter Partner, Germany; together with K
B (Tony) Norris as Special Adviser.
Drafts were reviewed by many persons and organisations, including those listed
below. Their comments were duly studied by the Update Task Group and, where
considered appropriate, have influenced the wording of the clauses.  Ihab Abu-Zahra,
CRC – Hassan Dorra, Egypt; Mushtaq Ahmad, NESPAK, Pakistan; Peter Batty, Post
Buckley International, USA; Roeland Bertrams, Clifford Chance, Netherlands; Bosen
He, Tianjin University, China; Manfred Breege, Lahmeyer International, Germany;
Pablo Bueno, TYPSA, Spain; Nael G Bunni, Consulting Engineer, Ireland; Peter H J
Chapman, Engineer & Barrister, UK; Ian Fraser, Beca Carter Hollings & Ferner, New
Zealand; Roy Goode, Oxford University, UK; Dan W Graham, Bristows Cooke &
Carpmael, UK; Mark Griffiths, Griffiths & Armour, UK; Geoffrey F Hawker, Consulting
Engineer, UK; Hesse & Steinberger, VDMA, Germany; Poul E Hvilsted, Elsamprojekt,
Denmark; Gordon L Jaynes, Whitman Breed Abbott & Morgan, UK; Tonny Jensen
(Chairman of FIDIC Quality Management Committee), COWI, Denmark; David S
Khalef, Jordan; Philip Loots & Associates, South Africa; Neil McCole, Merz and
McLellan, UK; Matthew Needham-Laing, Victoria Russell & Paul J Taylor, Berrymans
Lace Mawer, UK; Brian W Totterdill, Consulting Engineer, UK; David R Wightman &
Gerlando Butera, Nabarro Nathanson, UK; the Association of Japanese Consulting
Engineers; the Construction Industry Authority of the Philippines; European
International Contractors; O
RGAnisme de Liaison Industries Métalliques Européennes
(“ORGALIME”); the International Association of Dredging Contractors; the International
Bar Association; the Asian Development Bank; and the World Bank.
Acknowledgement of reviewers does not mean that such persons or organizations
approve of the wording of all clauses.
FIDIC wishes to record its appreciation of the time and effort devoted by all the above.
The ultimate decision on the form and content of the document rests with FIDIC.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====

FOREWORD
The Fédération Internationale des Ingénieurs-Conseils (FIDIC) published, in 1999, First
Editions of four new standard forms of contract:
Conditions of Contract for Construction,
which are recommended for building or engineering works designed by the
Employer or by his representative, the Engineer. Under the usual arrangements
for this type of contract, the Contractor constructs the works in accordance
with a design provided by the Employer. However, the works may include some
elements of Contractor-designed civil, mechanical, electrical and/or
construction works.
Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-Build,
which are recommended for the provision of electrical and/or mechanical plant,
and for the design and execution of building or engineering works. Under the
usual arrangements for this type of contract, the Contractor designs and
provides, in accordance with the Employer’s requirements, plant and/or other
works; which may include any combination of civil, mechanical, electrical
and/or construction works.
Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey Projects,
which may be suitable for the provision on a turnkey basis of a process or
power plant, of a factory or similar facility, or of an infrastructure project or other
type of development, where  (i) a higher degree of certainty of final price and
time is required, and  (ii) the Contractor takes total responsibility for the design
and execution of the project, with little involvement of the Employer. Under the
usual arrangements for turnkey projects, the Contractor carries out all the
Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC), providing a fully-equipped
facility, ready for operation (at the “turn of the key”).
Short Form of Contract,
which is recommended for building or engineering works of relatively small
capital value. Depending on the type of work and the circumstances, this form
may also be suitable for contracts of greater value, particularly for relatively
simple or repetitive work or work of short duration. Under the usual
arrangements for this type of contract, the Contractor constructs the works in
accordance with a design provided by the Employer or by his representative (if
any), but this form may also be suitable for a contract which includes, or wholly
comprises, Contractor-designed civil, mechanical, electrical and/or
construction works.
The forms are recommended for general use where tenders are invited on an
international basis. Modifications may be required in some jurisdictions, particularly if
the Conditions are to be used on domestic contracts. FIDIC considers the official and
authentic texts to be the versions in the English language.
In the preparation of these Conditions of Contract for Construction, it was recognised
that, while there are many sub-clauses which will be generally applicable, there are
some sub-clauses which must necessarily vary to take account of the circumstances
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====

relevant to the particular contract. The sub-clauses which were considered to be
applicable to many (but not all) contracts have been included in the General
Conditions, in order to facilitate their incorporation into each contract.
The General Conditions and the Particular Conditions will together comprise the
Conditions of Contract governing the rights and obligations of the parties. It will be
necessary to prepare the Particular Conditions for each individual contract, and to
take account of those sub-clauses in the General Conditions which mention the
Particular Conditions.
For this publication, the General Conditions were prepared on the following basis:
(i) interim and final payments will be determined by measurement, applying the
rates and prices in a Bill of Quantities;
(ii) if the wording in the General Conditions necessitates further data, then (unless
it is so descriptive that it would have to be detailed in the Specification) the sub-
clause makes reference to this data being contained in the Appendix to Tender,
the data either being prescribed by the Employer or being inserted by the
Tenderer;
(iii) where a sub-clause in the General Conditions deals with a matter on which
different contract terms are likely to be applicable for different contracts, the
principles applied in writing the sub-clause were:
(a) users would find it more convenient if any provisions which they did not
wish to apply could simply be deleted or not invoked, than if additional
text had to be written (in the Particular Conditions) because the General
Conditions did not cover their requirements;  or
(b) in other cases, where the application of (a) was thought to be
inappropriate, the sub-clause contains the provisions which were
considered applicable to most contracts.
For example, Sub-Clause 14.2 [ Advance Payment] is included for convenience, not
because of any FIDIC policy in respect of advance payments. This Sub-Clause
becomes inapplicable (even if it is not deleted) if it is disregarded by not specifying the
amount of the advance. It should therefore be noted that some of the provisions
contained in the General Conditions may not be appropriate for an apparently-typical
contract.
Further information on these aspects, example wording for other arrangements, and
other explanatory material and example wording to assist in the preparation of the
Particular Conditions and the other tender documents, are included within this
publication as Guidance for the Preparation of the Particular Conditions. Before
incorporating any example wording, it must be checked to ensure that it is wholly
suitable for the particular circumstances; if not, it must be amended.
Where example wording is amended, and in all cases where other amendments or
additions are made, care must be taken to ensure that no ambiguity is created, either
with the General Conditions or between the clauses in the Particular Conditions. It is
essential that all these drafting tasks, and the entire preparation of the tender
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====

documents, are entrusted to personnel with the relevant expertise, including the
contractual, technical and procurement aspects.
This publication concludes with example forms for the Letter of Tender, the Appendix
to Tender (providing a check-list of the sub-clauses which refer to it), the Contract
Agreement, and alternatives for the Dispute Adjudication Agreement. This Dispute
Adjudication Agreement provides text for the agreement between the Employer, the
Contractor and the person appointed to act either as sole adjudicator or as a member
of a three-person dispute adjudication board; and incorporates (by reference) the
terms in the Appendix to the General Conditions.
FIDIC intends to publish a guide to the use of its Conditions of Contract for
Construction, for Plant and Design-Build, and for EPC/Turnkey Projects. Another
relevant FIDIC publication is “Tendering Procedure”, which presents a systematic
approach to the selection of tenderers and the obtaining and evaluation of tenders.
In order to clarify the sequence of Contract activities, reference may be made to the
charts on the next two pages and to the Sub-Clauses listed below (some Sub-Clause
numbers are also stated in the charts). The charts are illustrative and must not be
taken into consideration in the interpretation of the Conditions of Contract.
1.1.3.1  & 13.7 Base Date
1.1.3.2  &   8.1 Commencement Date
1.1.6.6  &   4.2 Performance Security
1.1.4.7  &  14.3 Interim Payment Certificate
1.1.3.3  &   8.2 Time for Completion (as extended under 8.4)
1.1.3.4  &   9.1 Tests on Completion
1.1.3.5  &  10.1 Taking-Over Certificate
1.1.3.7  &  11.1 Defects Notification Period (as extended under 11.3)
1.1.3.8  &  11.9 Performance Certificate
1.1.4.4  &  14.13 Final Payment Certificate
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====

Issue of the
Tender
Documents
Base
Date
Submission
of the
Tender
Issue of the
Letter of
Acceptance
8.1
Commencement
Date
8.2 Time for
Completion
1
10.1 Issue of
Taking-Over
Certificate
4.2 Issue of the
Performance Security
4.2 Return of
the Performance
Security
Remedying
of Defects
Delay attributable
to the
Contractor
2
Tender
period
11.9 Issue of the
Performance
Certificate
9.1 Tests on
Completion
2
11 Notifying
of Defects
Defects
Notification
Period
3
28d <28d <21d
Typical sequence of Principal Events during Contracts for Construction
1. The Time for Completion is to be stated (in the Appendix to Tender) as a number of days, to which is added
any extensions of time under Sub-Clause 8.4.
2. In order to indicate the sequence of events, the above diagram is based upon the example of the Contractor
failing to comply with Sub-Clause 8.2.
3. The Defects Notification Period is to be stated (in the Appendix to Tender) as a number of days, to which is
added any extensions under Sub-Clause 11.3
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====

© FIDIC 1999
14.3 Contractor
submits Statement
to the Engineer
14.6 Engineer
issues Interim
Payment Certificate
14.7 Employer makes
the payment to the
Contractor
14.11 Contractor submits
Final Statement and the
14.12 discharge
14.7 Employer
makes payment
14.11 Contractor submits
draft final statement to the
Engineer
<28d
<56d
Typical sequence of Dispute Events envisaged in Clause 20
Typical sequence of Payment Events envisaged in Clause 14
14.13 Engineer issues
Final Payment
Certificate
<28d
Engineer verifies
statement, Contractor
submits information
Each of the
monthly (or
otherwise)
interim
payments
The final
payment
8.1
Commencement
Date
20.2 Parties
appoint the
DAB
20.4 A Party refers
a dispute to the
DAB
Arbitrator/s
appointed
>56d
DAB gives
its decision
<28d
20.6 A Party
may initiate
arbitration
20.4 A Party may
issue a “notice of
dissatisfaction”
Parties present
submissions to the DAB
<28d <84d
<56d
Amicable
settlement
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====

FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES INGENIEURS-CONSEILS
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF CONSULTING ENGINEERS
INTERNATIONALE VEREINIGUNG BERATENDER INGENIEURE
FEDERACION INTERNACIONAL DE INGENIEROS CONSOLTORES
GENERAL CONDITIONS
GUIDANCE FOR THE
PREPARATION OF
PARTICULAR CONDITIONS
FORMS OF LETTER OF
TENDER, CONTRACT
AGREEMENT AND 
DISPUTE AD
JUDICATION
AGREEMENT
Conditions of Contract
for CONSTRUCTION
FOR BUILDING AND ENGINEERING WORKS
DESIGNED BY THE EMPLOYER
General Conditions 
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====

i
General Conditions
CONTENTS
1 GENERAL PROVISIONS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.1 Definitions
1.2 Interpretation
1.3 Communications
1.4 Law and Language
1.5 Priority of Documents
1.6 Contract Agreement
1.7 Assignment
1.8 Care and Supply of Documents
1.9 Delayed Drawings or Instructions
1.10 Employer’s Use of Contractor’s Documents
1.11 Contractor’s Use of Employer’s Documents
1.12 Confidential Details
1.13 Compliance with Laws
1.14 Joint and Several Liability
2 THE EMPLOYER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.1 Right of Access to the Site
2.2 Permits, Licences or Approvals
2.3 Employer’s Personnel
2.4 Employer’s Financial Arrangements
2.5 Employer’s Claims
3 THE ENGINEER  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.1 Engineer’s Duties and Authority
3.2 Delegation by the Engineer
3.3 Instructions of the Engineer
3.4 Replacement of the Engineer
3.5 Determinations
4 THE CONTRACTOR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.1 Contractor’s General Obligations
4.2 Performance Security
4.3 Contractor’s Representative
4.4 Subcontractors
4.5 Assignment of Benefit of Subcontract
ERRATA to the First Edition 1999  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . inside back cover
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====

ii
4.6 Co-operation
4.7 Setting Out
4.8 Safety Procedures
4.9 Quality Assurance
4.10 Site Data
4.11 Sufficiency of the Accepted Contract Amount
4.12 Unforeseeable Physical Conditions
4.13 Rights of Way and Facilities
4.14 Avoidance of Interference
4.15 Access Route
4.16 Transport of Goods
4.17 Contractor’s Equipment
4.18 Protection of the Environment
4.19 Electricity, Water and Gas
4.20 Employer’s Equipment and Free-Issue Material
4.21 Progress Reports
4.22 Security of the Site
4.23 Contractor’s Operations on Site
4.24 Fossils
5 NOMINATED SUBCONTRACTORS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.1 Definition of “nominated Subcontractor”
5.2 Objection to Nomination
5.3 Payments to nominated Subcontractors
5.4 Evidence of Payments
6 STAFF AND LABOUR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6.1 Engagement of Staff and Labour
6.2 Rates of Wages and Conditions of Labour
6.3 Persons in the Service of Employer
6.4 Labour Laws
6.5 Working Hours
6.6 Facilities for Staff and Labour 
6.7 Health and Safety
6.8 Contractor’s Superintendence
6.9 Contractor’s Personnel
6.10 Records of Contractor’s Personnel and Equipment
6.11 Disorderly Conduct
7 PLANT, MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
7.1 Manner of Execution
7.2 Samples
7.3 Inspection
7.4 Testing
7.5 Rejection
7.6 Remedial Work
7.7 Ownership of Plant and Materials
7.8 Royalties
8 COMMENCEMENT, DELAYS AND SUSPENSION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
8.1 Commencement of Works
8.2 Time for Completion
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====

iii
8.3 Programme
8.4 Extension of Time for Completion
8.5 Delays Caused by Authorities
8.6 Rate of Progress
8.7 Delay Damages
8.8 Suspension of Work
8.9 Consequences of Suspension
8.10 Payment for Plant and Materials in Event of Suspension
8.11 Prolonged Suspension
8.12 Resumption of Work
9 TESTS ON COMPLETION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
9.1 Contractor’s Obligations
9.2 Delayed Tests
9.3 Retesting
9.4 Failure to Pass Tests on Completion
10 EMPLOYER’S TAKING OVER  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
10.1 Taking Over of the Works and Sections
10.2 Taking Over of Parts of the Works
10.3 Interference with Tests on Completion
10.4 Surfaces Requiring Reinstatement
11 DEFECTS LIABILITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
11.1 Completion of Outstanding Work and Remedying Defects
11.2 Cost of Remedying Defects
11.3 Extension of Defects Notification Period
11.4 Failure to Remedy Defects
11.5 Removal of Defective Work
11.6 Further Tests
11.7 Right of Access
11.8 Contractor to Search
11.9 Performance Certificate
11.10 Unfulfilled Obligations
11.11 Clearance of Site
12 MEASUREMENT AND EVALUATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
12.1 Works to be Measured
12.2 Method of Measurement
12.3 Evaluation
12.4 Omissions
13 VARIATIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
13.1 Right to Vary
13.2 Value Engineering
13.3 Variation Procedure
13.4 Payment in Applicable Currencies
13.5 Provisional Sums
13.6 Daywork
13.7 Adjustments for Changes in Legislation
13.8 Adjustments for Changes in Cost
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 14 =====

iv
14 CONTRACT PRICE AND PAYMENT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
14.1 The Contract Price
14.2 Advance Payment
14.3 Application for Interim Payment Certificates
14.4 Schedule of Payments
14.5 Plant and Materials intended for the Works
14.6 Issue of Interim Payment Certificates
14.7 Payment
14.8 Delayed Payment
14.9 Payment of Retention Money
14.10 Statement at Completion
14.11 Application for Final Payment Certificate
14.12 Discharge
14.13 Issue of Final Payment Certificate
14.14 Cessation of Employer’s Liability
14.15 Currencies of Payment
15 TERMINATION BY EMPLOYER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
15.1 Notice to Correct
15.2 Termination by Employer
15.3 Valuation at Date of Termination
15.4 Payment after Termination
15.5 Employer’s Entitlement to Termination
16 SUSPENSION AND TERMINATION BY CONTRACTOR  . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
16.1 Contractor’s Entitlement to Suspend Work
16.2 Termination by Contractor
16.3 Cessation of Work and Removal of Contractor’s Equipment
16.4 Payment on Termination
17 RISK AND RESPONSIBILITY  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
17.1 Indemnities
17.2 Contractor’s Care of the Works
17.3 Employer’s Risks
17.4 Consequences of Employer’s Risks
17.5 Intellectual and Industrial Property Rights
17.6 Limitation of Liability
18 INSURANCE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
18.1 General Requirements for Insurances
18.2 Insurance for Works and Contractor’s Equipment
18.3 Insurance against Injury to Persons and Damage to Property
18.4 Insurance for Contractor’s Personnel
19 FORCE MAJEURE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
19.1 Definition of Force Majeure
19.2 Notice of Force Majeure
19.3 Duty to Minimise Delay
19.4 Consequences of Force Majeure
19.5 Force Majeure Affecting Subcontractor
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 15 =====

v
19.6 Optional Termination, Payment and Release
19.7 Release from Performance under the Law
20 CLAIMS, DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
20.1 Contractor’s Claims
20.2 Appointment of the Dispute Adjudication Board
20.3 Failure to Agree Dispute Adjudication Board
20.4 Obtaining Dispute Adjudication Board’s Decision
20.5 Amicable Settlement
20.6 Arbitration
20.7 Failure to Comply with Dispute Adjudication Board’s Decision
20.8 Expiry of Dispute Adjudication Board’s Appointment
APPENDIX
GENERAL CONDITIONS OF DISPUTE ADJUDICATION AGREEMENT  . . . . . 63
INDEX OF SUB-CLAUSES  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 16 =====

vi
1.1.4.1 Accepted Contract Amount
1.1.1.9 Appendix to Tender
1.1.3.1 Base Date
1.1.1.10 Bill of Quantities
1.1.3.2 Commencement Date
1.1.1.1 Contract
1.1.1.2 Contract Agreement
1.1.4.2 Contract Price
1.1.2.3 Contractor
1.1.6.1 Contractor’s Documents
1.1.5.1 Contractor’s Equipment
1.1.2.7 Contractor’s Personnel
1.1.2.5 Contractor’s Representative
1.1.4.3 Cost
1.1.6.2 Country
1.1.2.9 DAB
1.1.3.9 day
1.1.1.10 Daywork Schedule
1.1.3.7 Defects Notification Period
1.1.1.6 Drawings
1.1.2.2 Employer
1.1.6.3 Employer’s Equipment
1.1.2.6 Employer’s Personnel
1.1.2.4 Engineer
1.1.2.10 FIDIC
1.1.4.4 Final Payment Certificate
1.1.4.5 Final Statement
1.1.6.4 Force Majeure
1.1.4.6 Foreign Currency
1.1.5.2 Goods
1.1.4.7 Interim Payment Certificate
1.1.6.5 Laws
1.1.1.3 Letter of Acceptance
1.1.1.4 Letter of Tender
1.1.4.8 Local Currency
1.1.5.3 Materials
1.1.2.1 Party
1.1.4.9 Payment Certificate
1.1.3.8 Performance Certificate
1.1.6.6 Performance Security
1.1.5.4 Permanent Works
1.1.5.5 Plant
1.1.4.10 Provisional Sum
1.1.4.11 Retention Money
1.1.1.7 Schedules
1.1.5.6 Section
1.1.6.7 Site
1.1.1.5 Specification
1.1.4.12 Statement
1.1.2.8 Subcontractor
1.1.3.5 Taking-Over Certificate
1.1.5.7 Temporary Works
1.1.1.8 Tender
1.1.3.6 Tests after Completion
1.1.3.4 Tests on Completion
1.1.3.3 Time for Completion
1.1.6.8 Unforeseeable
1.1.6.9 Variation
1.1.5.8 Works
1.1.3.9 year
Definitions listed alphabetically
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 17 =====

1General Conditions
In the Conditions of Contract (“these Conditions”), which include Particular Conditions
and these General Conditions, the following words and expressions shall have the
meanings stated. Words indicating persons or parties include corporations and other
legal entities, except where the context requires otherwise.
1.1.1.1 “Contract” means the Contract Agreement, the Letter of Acceptance, the
Letter of Tender, these Conditions, the Specification, the Drawings, the
Schedules, and the further documents (if any) which are listed in the
Contract Agreement or in the Letter of Acceptance.
1.1.1.2 “Contract Agreement” means the contract agreement (if any) referred to in
Sub-Clause 1.6 [Contract Agreement].
1.1.1.3 “Letter of Acceptance ” means the letter of formal acceptance, signed by
the Employer, of the Letter of Tender, including any annexed memoranda
comprising agreements between and signed by both Parties. If there is no
such letter of acceptance, the expression “Letter of Acceptance” means the
Contract Agreement and the date of issuing or receiving the Letter of
Acceptance means the date of signing the Contract Agreement.
1.1.1.4 “Letter of Tender” means the document entitled letter of tender, which was
completed by the Contractor and includes the signed offer to the Employer
for the Works.
1.1.1.5 “Specification ” means the document entitled specification, as included in
the Contract, and any additions and modifications to the specification in
accordance with the Contract. Such document specifies the Works.
1.1.1.6 “Drawings” means the drawings of the Works, as included in the Contract,
and any additional and modified drawings issued by (or on behalf of) the
Employer in accordance with the Contract.
1.1.1.7 “Schedules” means the document(s) entitled schedules, completed by the
Contractor and submitted with the Letter of Tender, as included in the
Contract. Such document may include the Bill of Quantities, data, lists, and
schedules of rates and/or prices.
1.1.1.8 “Tender” means the Letter of Tender and all other documents which the
Contractor submitted with the Letter of Tender, as included in the Contract.
1.1.1.9 “Appendix to Tender” means the completed pages entitled appendix to
tender which are appended to and form part of the Letter of Tender.
1.1.1.10 “Bill of Quantities ” and “Daywork Schedule” mean the documents so
named (if any) which are comprised in the Schedules.
1.1
Definitions
1.1.1
The Contract
1
General Provisions
General Conditions
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 18 =====

2 Conditions of Contract for Construction
1.1.2.1 “Party” means the Employer or the Contractor, as the context requires.
1.1.2.2 “Employer” means the person named as employer in the Appendix to
Tender and the legal successors in title to this person.
1.1.2.3 “ Contractor” means the person(s) named as contractor in the Letter of
Tender accepted by the Employer and the legal successors in title to this
person(s).
1.1.2.4 “ Engineer” means the person appointed by the Employer to act as the
Engineer for the purposes of the Contract and named in the Appendix to
Tender, or other person appointed from time to time by the Employer and
notified to the Contractor under Sub-Clause 3.4 [Replacement of the Engineer].
1.1.2.5 “ Contractor’s Representative ” means the person named by the
Contractor in the Contract or appointed from time to time by the Contractor
under Sub-Clause 4.3 [Contractor’s Representative], who acts on behalf of
the Contractor.
1.1.2.6 “Employer’s Personnel” means the Engineer, the assistants referred to in
Sub-Clause 3.2 [Delegation by the Engineer ] and all other staff, labour and
other employees of the Engineer and of the Employer; and any other
personnel notified to the Contractor, by the Employer or the Engineer, as
Employer’s Personnel.
1.1.2.7 “Contractor’s Personnel” means the Contractor’s Representative and all
personnel whom the Contractor utilises on Site, who may include the staff,
labour and other employees of the Contractor and of each Subcontractor;
and any other personnel assisting the Contractor in the execution ofthe Works.
1.1.2.8 “ Subcontractor ” means any person named in the Contract as a
subcontractor, or any person appointed as a subcontractor, for a part of the
Works; and the legal successors in title to each of these persons.
1.1.2.9 “DAB” means the person or three persons so named in the Contract, or
other person(s) appointed under Sub-Clause 20.2 [Appointment of the
Dispute Adjudication Board ] or Sub-Clause 20.3 [Failure to Agree Dispute
Adjudication Board]
1.1.2.10 “FIDIC” means the Fédération Internationale des Ingénieurs-Conseils, the
international federation of consulting engineers. 
1.1.3.1 “Base Date ” means the date 28 days prior to the latest date for submission
of the Tender.
1.1.3.2 “Commencement Date” means the date notified under Sub-Clause 8.1
[Commencement of Works].
1.1.3.3 “Time for Completion ” means the time for completing the Works or a
Section (as the case may be) under Sub-Clause 8.2 [ Time for Completion],
as stated in the Appendix to Tender (with any extension under Sub-
Clause 8.4 [ Extension of Time for Completion ]), calculated from the
Commencement Date.
1.1.3.4 “Tests on Completion ” means the tests which are specified in the Contract
or agreed by both Parties or instructed as a Variation, and which are carried
1.1.2
Parties and Persons
1.1.3
Dates, Tests, Periods
and Completion
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 19 =====

3General Conditions
out under Clause 9 [Tests on Completion] before the Works or a Section (as
the case may be) are taken over by the Employer.
1.1.3.5 “Taking-Over Certificate” means a certificate issued under Clause 10
[Employer’s Taking Over].
1.1.3.6 “Tests after Completion ” means the tests (if any) which are specified in the
Contract and which are carried out in accordance with the provisions of the
Particular Conditions after the Works or a Section (as the case may be) are
taken over by the Employer.
1.1.3.7 “Defects Notification Period ” means the period for notifying defects in the
Works or a Section (as the case may be) under Sub-Clause 11.1
[Completion of Outstanding Work and Remedying Defects], as stated in the
Appendix to Tender (with any extension under Sub-Clause 11.3 [ Extension
of Defects Notification Period]), calculated from the date on which the Works
or Section is completed as certified under Sub-Clause 10.1 [ Taking Over of
the Works and Sections].
1.1.3.8 “ Performance Certificate ” means the certificate issued under Sub-
Clause 11.9 [Performance Certificate].
1.1.3.9 “day” means a calendar day and “ year” means 365 days.
1.1.4.1 “Accepted Contract Amount” means the amount accepted in the Letter of
Acceptance for the execution and completion of the Works and the
remedying of any defects.
1.1.4.2 “Contract Price ” means the price defined in Sub-Clause 14.1 [ The
Contract Price], and includes adjustments in accordance with the Contract.
1.1.4.3 “Cost” means all expenditure reasonably incurred (or to be incurred) by the
Contractor, whether on or off the Site, including overhead and similar
charges, but does not include profit.
1.1.4.4 “Final Payment Certificate ” means the payment certificate issued under
Sub-Clause 14.13 [Issue of Final Payment Certificate ].
1.1.4.5 “Final Statement ” means the statement defined in Sub-Clause 14.11
[Application for Final Payment Certificate].
1.1.4.6 “Foreign Currency ” means a currency in which part (or all) of the Contract
Price is payable, but not the Local Currency.
1.1.4.7 “ Interim Payment Certificate” means a payment certificate issued under
Clause 14 [ Contract Price and Payment ], other than the Final Payment
Certificate.
1.1.4.8 “Local Currency” means the currency of the Country.
1.1.4.9 “Payment Certificate ” means a payment certificate issued under Clause 14
[ Contract Price and Payment ].
1.1.4.10 “Provisional Sum ” means a sum (if any) which is specified in the Contract as
a provisional sum, for the execution of any part of the Works or for the supply
of Plant, Materials or services under Sub-Clause 13.5 [Provisional Sums].
1.1.4
Money and Payments
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 20 =====

4 Conditions of Contract for Construction
1.1.4.11 “Retention Money ” means the accumulated retention moneys which the
Employer retains under Sub-Clause 14.3 [ Application for Interim Payment
Certificates] and pays under Sub-Clause 14.9 [ Payment of Retention
Money].
1.1.4.12 “Statement” means a statement submitted by the Contractor as part of an
application, under Clause 14 [ Contract Price and Payment ], for a payment
certificate.
1.1.5.1 “Contractor’s Equipment ” means all apparatus, machinery, vehicles and
other things required for the execution and completion of the Works and the
remedying of any defects. However, Contractor’s Equipment excludes
Temporary Works, Employer’s Equipment (if any), Plant, Materials and any
other things intended to form or forming part of the Permanent Works.
1.1.5.2 “Goods ” means Contractor’s Equipment, Materials, Plant and Temporary
Works, or any of them as appropriate.
1.1.5.3 “Materials ” means things of all kinds (other than Plant) intended to form or
forming part of the Permanent Works, including the supply-only materials (if
any) to be supplied by the Contractor under the Contract.
1.1.5.4 “Permanent Works” means the permanent works to be executed by the
Contractor under the Contract.
1.1.5.5 “Plant” means the apparatus, machinery and vehicles intended to form or
forming part of the Permanent Works.
1.1.5.6 “Section” means a part of the Works specified in the Appendix to Tender as
a Section (if any).
1.1.5.7 “Temporary Works” means all temporary works of every kind (other than
Contractor’s Equipment) required on Site for the execution and completion
of the Permanent Works and the remedying of any defects.
1.1.5.8 “Works” mean the Permanent Works and the Temporary Works, or either of
them as appropriate.
1.1.6.1 “ Contractor’s Documents ” means the calculations, computer programs
and other software, drawings, manuals, models  and other documents of
a technical nature (if any) supplied by the Contractor under the
Contract.
1.1.6.2 “Country ” means the country in which the Site (or most of it) is located,
where the Permanent Works are to be executed.
1.1.6.3 “Employer’s Equipment ” means the apparatus, machinery and vehicles (if
any) made available by the Employer for the use of the Contractor in the
execution of the Works, as stated in the Specification; but does not include
Plant which has not been taken over by the Employer.
1.1.6.4 “Force Majeure” is defined in Clause 19 [ Force Majeure].
1.1.6.5 “Laws” means all national (or state) legislation, statutes, ordinances and
other laws, and regulations and by-laws of any legally constituted public
authority.
1.1.5
Works and Goods
1.1.6
Other Definitions
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 21 =====

5General Conditions
1.1.6.6 “Performance Security” means the security (or securities, if any) under
Sub-Clause 4.2 [Performance Security].
1.1.6.7 “Site” means the places where the Permanent Works are to be executed
and to which Plant and Materials are to be delivered, and any other places
as may be specified in the Contract as forming part of the Site.
1.1.6.8 “Unforeseeable ” means not reasonably foreseeable by an experienced
contractor by the date for submission of the Tender.
1.1.6.9 “Variation” means any change to the Works, which is instructed or
approved as a variation under Clause 13 [ Variations and Adjustments].
In the Contract, except where the context requires otherwise:
(a) words indicating one gender include all genders;
(b) words indicating the singular also include the plural and words indicating the
plural also include the singular;
(c) provisions including the word “agree”, “agreed” or “agreement” require the
agreement to be recorded in writing,  and
(d) “written” or “in writing” means hand-written, type-written, printed or
electronically made, and resulting in a permanent record.
The marginal words and other headings shall not be taken into consideration in the
interpretation of these Conditions.
Wherever these Conditions provide for the giving or issuing of approvals, certificates,
consents, determinations, notices and requests, these communications shall be:
(a) in writing and delivered by hand (against receipt), sent by mail or courier, or
transmitted using any of the agreed systems of electronic transmission as
stated in the Appendix to Tender;  and
(b) delivered, sent or transmitted to the address for the recipient’s communications
as stated in the Appendix to Tender. However:
(i) if the recipient gives notice of another address, communications shall
thereafter be delivered accordingly;  and
(ii) if the recipient has not stated otherwise when requesting an approval or
consent, it may be sent to the address from which the request was
issued.
Approvals, certificates, consents and determinations shall not be unreasonably
withheld or delayed. When a certificate is issued to a Party, the certifier shall send a
copy to the other Party. When a notice is issued to a Party, by the other Party or the
Engineer, a copy shall be sent to the Engineer or the other Party, as the case may
be. 
The Contract shall be governed by the law of the country (or other jurisdiction) stated
in the Appendix to Tender.
If there are versions of any part of the Contract which are written in more than one
language, the version which is in the ruling language stated in the Appendix to Tender
shall prevail.
1.2
Interpretation
1.3
Communications
1.4
Law and Language
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 22 =====

6 Conditions of Contract for Construction
The language for communications shall be that stated in the Appendix to Tender. If no
language is stated there, the language for communications shall be the language in
which the Contract (or most of it) is written. 
The documents forming the Contract are to be taken as mutually explanatory of one
another. For the purposes of interpretation, the priority of the documents shall be in
accordance with the following sequence:
(a) the Contract Agreement (if any),
(b) the Letter of Acceptance,
(c) the Letter of Tender,
(d) the Particular Conditions,
(e) these General Conditions,
(f) the Specification,
(g) the Drawings,  and
(h) the Schedules and any other documents forming part of the Contract.
If an ambiguity or discrepancy is found in the documents, the Engineer shall issue any
necessary clarification or instruction. 
The Parties shall enter into a Contract Agreement within 28 days after the Contractor
receives the Letter of Acceptance, unless they agree otherwise. The Contract
Agreement shall be based upon the form annexed to the Particular Conditions. The
costs of stamp duties and similar charges (if any) imposed by law in connection with
entry into the Contract Agreement shall be borne by the Employer. 
Neither Party shall assign the whole or any part of the Contract or any benefit or
interest in or under the Contract. However, either Party:
(a) may assign the whole or any part with the prior agreement of the other Party,
at the sole discretion of such other Party,  and
(b) may, as security in favour of a bank or financial institution, assign its right to any
moneys due, or to become due, under the Contract. 
The Specification and Drawings shall be in the custody and care of the Employer.
Unless otherwise stated in the Contract, two copies of the Contract and of each
subsequent Drawing shall be supplied to the Contractor, who may make or request
further copies at the cost of the Contractor.
Each of the Contractor’s Documents shall be in the custody and care of the
Contractor, unless and until taken over by the Employer. Unless otherwise stated in
the Contract, the Contractor shall supply to the Engineer six copies of each of the
Contractor’s Documents.
The Contractor shall keep, on the Site, a copy of the Contract, publications named in
the Specification, the Contractor’s Documents (if any), the Drawings and Variations
and other communications given under the Contract. The Employer’s Pe rsonnel shall
have the right of access to all these documents at all reasonable times.
If a Party becomes aware of an error or defect of a technical nature in a document
which was prepared for use in executing the Works, the Party shall promptly give
notice to the other Party of such error or defect.
1.5
Priority of Documents
1.6
Contract Agreement
1.7
Assignment
1.8
Care and Supply of 
Documents
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 23 =====

7General Conditions
The Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer whenever the Works are likely to be
delayed or disrupted if any necessary drawing or instruction is not issued to the
Contractor within a particular time, which shall be reasonable. The notice shall include
details of the necessary drawing or instruction, details of why and by when it should
be issued, and details of the nature and amount of the delay or disruption likely to be
suffered if it is late.
If the Contractor suffers delay and/or incurs Cost as a result of a failure of the Engineer
to issue the notified drawing or instruction within a time which is reasonable and is
specified in the notice with supporting details, the Contractor shall give a further notice
to the Engineer and shall be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 20.1 [Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion], and
(b) payment of any such Cost plus reasonable profit, which shall be included in the
Contract Price.
After receiving this further notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine these matters.
However, if and to the extent that the Engineer’s failure was caused by any error or
delay by the Contractor, including an error in, or delay in the submission of, any of the
Contractor’s Documents, the Contractor shall not be entitled to such extension of
time, Cost or profit.  
As between the Parties, the Contractor shall retain the copyright and other intellectual
property rights in the Contractor’s Documents and other design documents made by
(or on behalf of) the Contractor.
The Contractor shall be deemed (by signing the Contract) to give to the Employer a
non-terminable transferable non-exclusive royalty-free licence to copy, use and
communicate the Contractor’s Documents, including making and using modifications
of them. This licence shall:
(a) apply throughout the actual or intended working life (whichever is longer) of the
relevant parts of the Works,
(b) entitle any person in proper possession of the relevant part of the Works to
copy, use and communicate the Contractor’s Documents for the purposes of
completing, operating, maintaining, altering, adjusting, repairing and
demolishing the Works,  and
(c) in the case of Contractor’s Documents which are in the form of computer
programs and other software, permit their use on any computer on the Site and
other places as envisaged by the Contract, including replacements of any
computers supplied by the Contractor.
The Contractor’s Documents and other design documents made by (or on behalf of)
the Contractor shall not, without the Contractor’s consent, be used, copied or
communicated to a third party by (or on behalf of) the Employer for purposes other
than those permitted under this Sub-Clause.
As between the Parties, the Employer shall retain the copyright and other intellectual
property rights in the Specification, the Drawings and other documents made by (or
on behalf of) the Employer. The Contractor may, at his cost, copy, use, and obtain
communication of these documents for the purposes of the Contract. They shall not,
1.9
Delayed Drawings or
Instructions
1.10
Employer’s Use of
Contractor’s Documents
1.11
Contractor’s Use of 
Employer’s Documents
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====

8 Conditions of Contract for Construction
without the Employer’s consent, be copied, used or communicated to a third party by
the Contractor, except as necessary for the purposes of the Contract.  
The Contractor shall disclose all such confidential and other information as the
Engineer may reasonably require in order to verify the Contractor’s compliance with
the Contract. 
The Contractor shall, in performing the Contract, comply with applicable Laws. Unless
otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions:
(a) the Employer shall have obtained (or shall obtain) the planning, zoning or similar
permission for the Permanent Works, and any other permissions described in
the Specification as having been (or being) obtained by the Employer; and the
Employer shall indemnify and hold the Contractor harmless against and from
the consequences of any failure to do so;  and
(b) the Contractor shall give all notices, pay all taxes, duties and fees, and obtain
all permits, licences and approvals, as required by the Laws in relation to the
execution and completion of the Works and the remedying of any defects; and
the Contractor shall indemnify and hold the Employer harmless against and
from the consequences of any failure to do so. 
If the Contractor constitutes (under applicable Laws) a joint venture, consortium or
other unincorporated grouping of two or more persons:
(a) these persons shall be deemed to be jointly and severally liable to the Employer
for the performance of the Contract;
(b) these persons shall notify the Employer of their leader who shall have authority
to bind the Contractor and each of these persons;  and
(c) the Contractor shall not alter its composition or legal status without the prior
consent of the Employer.  
The Employer shall give the Contractor right of access to, and possession of, all parts
of the Site within the time (or times) stated in the Appendix to Tender. The right and
possession may not be exclusive to the Contractor. If, under the Contract, the
Employer is required to give (to the Contractor) possession of any foundation,
structure, plant or means of access, the Employer shall do so in the time and manner
stated in the Specification. However, the Employer may withhold any such right or
possession until the Performance Security has been received.
If no such time is stated in the Appendix to Tender, the Employer shall give the
Contractor right of access to, and possession of, the Site within such times as may
be required to enable the Contractor to proceed in accordance with the programme
submitted under Sub-Clause 8.3 [Programme].
If the Contractor suffers delay and/or incurs Cost as a result of a failure by the
Employer to give any such right or possession within such time, the Contractor shall
give notice to the Engineer and shall be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 20.1
[Contractor’s Claims] to:
1.12
Confidential Details
1.13
Compliance with Laws
1.14
Joint and Several
Liability
2.1
Right of Access to
the Site
2The Employer
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 25 =====

9General Conditions
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion], and
(b) payment of any such Cost plus reasonable profit, which shall be included in the
Contract Price.
After receiving this notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine these matters.
However, if and to the extent that the Employer’s failure was caused by any error or
delay by the Contractor, including an error in, or delay in the submission of, any of the
Contractor’s Documents, the Contractor shall not be entitled to such extension of
time, Cost or profit. 
The Employer shall (where he is in a position to do so) provide reasonable assistance
to the Contractor at the request of the Contractor:
(a) by obtaining copies of the Laws of the Country which are relevant to the
Contract but are not readily available,  and
(b) for the Contractor’s applications for any permits, licences or approvals required
by the Laws of the Country:
(i) which the Contractor is required to obtain under Sub-Clause 1.13
[Compliance with Laws],
(ii) for the delivery of Goods, including clearance through customs, and
(iii) for the export of Contractor’s Equipment when it is removed from the Site.
The Employer shall be responsible for ensuring that the Employer’s Personnel and the
Employer’s other contractors on the Site:
(a) co-operate with the Contractor’s efforts under Sub-Clause 4.6 [ Co-operation],
and
(b) take actions similar to those which the Contractor is required to take under sub-
paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Sub-Clause 4.8 [ Safety Procedures] and under
Sub-Clause 4.18 [Protection of the Environment ].  
The Employer shall submit, within 28 days after receiving any request from the
Contractor, reasonable evidence that financial arrangements have been made and are
being maintained which will enable the Employer to pay the Contract Price (as
estimated at that time) in accordance with Clause 14 [Contract Price and Payment]. If
the Employer intends to make any material change to his financial arrangements, the
Employer shall give notice to the Contractor with detailed particulars.
If the Employer considers himself to be entitled to any payment under any Clause of
these Conditions or otherwise in connection with the Contract, and/or to any extension
of the Defects Notification Period, the Employer or the Engineer shall give notice and
particulars to the Contractor. However, notice is not required for payments due under
Sub-Clause 4.19 [ Electricity, Water and Gas ], under Sub-Clause 4.20 [ Employer’s
Equipment and Free-Issue Material], or for other services requested by the Contractor.
The notice shall be given as soon as practicable after the Employer became aware of
the event or circumstances giving rise to the claim. A notice relating to any extension
of the Defects Notification Period shall be given before the expiry of such period.
2.2
Permits, Licences or 
Approvals
2.3
Employer’s Personnel
2.4
Employer’s Financial 
Arrangements
2.5
Employer’s Claims
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 26 =====

10 Conditions of Contract for Construction
The particulars shall specify the Clause or other basis of the claim, and shall include
substantiation of the amount and/or extension to which the Employer considers
himself to be entitled in connection with the Contract. The Engineer shall then proceed
in accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations] to agree or determine  (i) the
amount (if any) which the Employer is entitled to be paid by the Contractor, and/or
(ii) the extension (if any) of the Defects Notification Period in accordance with Sub-
Clause 11.3 [Extension of Defects Notification Period ].
This amount may be included as a deduction in the Contract Price and Payment
Certificates. The Employer shall only be entitled to set off against or make any
deduction from an amount certified in a Payment Certificate, or to otherwise claim
against the Contractor, in accordance with this Sub-Clause.
The Employer shall appoint the Engineer who shall carry out the duties assigned to
him in the Contract. The Engineer’s staff shall include suitably qualified engineers and
other professionals who are competent to carry out these duties.
The Engineer shall have no authority to amend the Contract.
The Engineer may exercise the authority attributable to the Engineer as specified in or
necessarily to be implied from the Contract. If the Engineer is required to obtain the
approval of the Employer before exercising a specified authority, the requirements shall
be as stated in the Particular Conditions. The Employer undertakes not to impose
further constraints on the Engineer’s authority, except as agreed with the Contractor.
However, whenever the Engineer exercises a specified authority for which the
Employer’s approval is required, then (for the purposes of the Contract) the Employer
shall be deemed to have given approval.
Except as otherwise stated in these Conditions:
(a) whenever carrying out duties or exercising authority, specified in or implied by
the Contract, the Engineer shall be deemed to act for the Employer;
(b) the Engineer has no authority to relieve either Party of any duties, obligations or
responsibilities under the Contract;  and
(c) any approval, check, certificate, consent, examination, inspection, instruction,
notice, proposal, request, test, or similar act by the Engineer (including absence
of disapproval) shall not relieve the Contractor from any responsibility he has
under the Contract, including responsibility for errors, omissions, discrepancies
and non-compliances.
The Engineer may from time to time assign duties and delegate authority to assistants,
and may also revoke such assignment or delegation. These assistants may include a
resident engineer, and/or independent inspectors appointed to inspect and/or test
items of Plant and/or Materials. The assignment, delegation or revocation shall be in
writing and shall not take effect until copies have been received by both Parties.
However, unless otherwise agreed by both Parties, the Engineer shall not delegate the
authority to determine any matter in accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 [Determinations].
Assistants shall be suitably qualified persons, who are competent to carry out these
3.1
Engineer’s Duties and 
Authority
3.2
Delegation by the 
Engineer
3The Engineer
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 27 =====

11General Conditions
duties and exercise this authority, and who are fluent in the language for
communications defined in Sub-Clause 1.4 [Law and Language].
Each assistant, to whom duties have been assigned or authority has been delegated,
shall only be authorised to issue instructions to the Contractor to the extent defined
by the delegation. Any approval, check, certificate, consent, examination, inspection,
instruction, notice, proposal, request, test, or similar act by an assistant, in
accordance with the delegation, shall have the same effect as though the act had
been an act of the Engineer. However:
(a) any failure to disapprove any work, Plant or Materials shall not constitute
approval, and shall therefore not prejudice the right of the Engineer to reject the
work, Plant or Materials;
(b) if the Contractor questions any determination or instruction of an assistant, the
Contractor may refer the matter to the Engineer, who shall promptly confirm,
reverse or vary the determination or instruction. 
The Engineer may issue to the Contractor (at any time) instructions and additional
or modified Drawings which may be necessary for the execution of the Works and
the remedying of any defects, all in accordance with the Contract. The Contractor
shall only take instructions from the Engineer, or from an assistant to whom the
appropriate authority has been delegated under this Clause. If an instruction
constitutes a Variation, Clause 13 [ Variations and Adjustments ] shall apply.
The Contractor shall comply with the instructions given by the Engineer or delegated
assistant, on any matter related to the Contract. Whenever practicable, their
instructions shall be given in writing. If the Engineer or a delegated assistant:
(a) gives an oral instruction,
(b) receives a written confirmation of the instruction, from (or on behalf of) the
Contractor, within two working days after giving the instruction,  and
(c) does not reply by issuing a written rejection and/or instruction within two
working days after receiving the confirmation,
then the confirmation shall constitute the written instruction of the Engineer or
delegated assistant (as the case may be).
If the Employer intends to replace the Engineer, the Employer shall, not less than 42
days before the intended date of replacement, give notice to the Contractor of the
name, address and relevant experience of the intended replacement Engineer.
The Employer shall not replace the Engineer with a person against whom the
Contractor raises reasonable objection by notice to the Employer, with supporting
particulars.
Whenever these Conditions provide that the Engineer shall proceed in accordance
with this Sub-Clause 3.5 to agree or determine any matter, the Engineer shall consult
with each Party in an endeavour to reach agreement. If agreement is not achieved, the
Engineer shall make a fair determination in accordance with the Contract, taking due
regard of all relevant circumstances.
The Engineer shall give notice to both Parties of each agreement or determination, with
supporting particulars. Each Party shall give effect to each agreement or determination
unless and until revised under Clause 20 [Claims, Disputes and Arbitration].
3.3
Instructions of the
Engineer
3.4
Replacement of the 
Engineer
3.5
Determinations
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 28 =====

Conditions of Contract for Construction12
The Contractor shall design (to the extent specified in the Contract), execute and
complete the Works in accordance with the Contract and with the Engineer’s
instructions, and shall remedy any defects in the Works. 
The Contractor shall provide the Plant and Contractor’s Documents specified in the
Contract, and all Contractor’s Personnel, Goods, consumables and other things and
services, whether of a temporary or permanent nature, required in and for this design,
execution, completion and remedying of defects.
The Contractor shall be responsible for the adequacy, stability and safety of all Site
operations and of all methods of construction. Except to the extent specified in the
Contract, the Contractor  (i) shall be responsible for all Contractor’s Documents,
Temporary Works, and such design of each item of Plant and Materials as is required
for the item to be in accordance with the Contract, and  (ii) shall not otherwise be
responsible for the design or specification of the Permanent Works.
The Contractor shall, whenever required by the Engineer, submit details of the
arrangements and methods which the Contractor proposes to adopt for the execution
of the Works. No significant alteration to these arrangements and methods shall be
made without this having previously been notified to the Engineer.
If the Contract specifies that the Contractor shall design any part of the Permanent
Works, then unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions:
(a) the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer the Contractor’s Documents for this
part in accordance with the procedures specified in the Contract;
(b) these Contractor’s Documents shall be in accordance with the Specification
and Drawings, shall be written in the language for communications defined in
Sub-Clause 1.4 [ Law and Language], and shall include additional information
required by the Engineer to add to the Drawings for co-ordination of each
Party’s designs;
(c) the Contractor shall be responsible for this part and it shall, when the Works are
completed, be fit for such purposes for which the part is intended as are
specified in the Contract;  and
(d) prior to the commencement of the Tests on Completion, the Contractor shall
submit to the Engineer the “as-built” documents and operation and
maintenance manuals in accordance with the Specification and in sufficient
detail for the Employer to operate, maintain, dismantle, reassemble, adjust and
repair this part of the Works. Such part shall not be considered to be completed
for the purposes of taking-over under Sub-Clause 10.1 [Taking Over of the
Works and Sections] until these documents and manuals have been submitted
to the Engineer.
The Contractor shall obtain (at his cost) a Performance Security for proper
performance, in the amount and currencies stated in the Appendix to Tender. If an
amount is not stated in the Appendix to Tender, this Sub-Clause shall not apply.
The Contractor shall deliver the Performance Security to the Employer within 28 days
after receiving the Letter of Acceptance, and shall send a copy to the Engineer. The
Performance Security shall be issued by an entity and from within a country (or other
4.1
Contractor’s General 
Obligations
4.2
Performance Security
4The Contractor
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====

13General Conditions
jurisdiction) approved by the Employer, and shall be in the form annexed to the
Particular Conditions or in another form approved by the Employer.
The Contractor shall ensure that the Performance Security is valid and enforceable until
the Contractor has executed and completed the Works and remedied any defects. If
the terms of the Performance Security specify its expiry date, and the Contractor has
not become entitled to receive the Performance Certificate by the date 28 days prior to
the expiry date, the Contractor shall extend the validity of the Performance Security until
the Works have been completed and any defects have been remedied.
The Employer shall not make a claim under the Performance Security, except for
amounts to which the Employer is entitled under the Contract in the event of:
(a) failure by the Contractor to extend the validity of the Performance Security as
described in the preceding paragraph, in which event the Employer may claim
the full amount of the Performance Security,
(b) failure by the Contractor to pay the Employer an amount due, as either agreed
by the Contractor or determined under Sub-Clause 2.5 [ Employer’s Claims] or
Clause 20 [Claims, Disputes and Arbitration ], within 42 days after this
agreement or determination,
(c) failure by the Contractor to remedy a default within 42 days after receiving the
Employer’s notice requiring the default to be remedied,  or
(d) circumstances which entitle the Employer to termination under Sub-
Clause 15.2 [ Termination by Employer], irrespective of whether notice of
termination has been given.
The Employer shall indemnify and hold the Contractor harmless against and from all
damages, losses and expenses (including legal fees and expenses) resulting from a
claim under the Performance Security to the extent to which the Employer was not
entitled to make the claim.
The Employer shall return the Performance Security to the Contractor within 21 days
after receiving a copy of the Performance Certificate. 
The Contractor shall appoint the Contractor’s Representative and shall give him all
authority necessary to act on the Contractor’s behalf under the Contract.
Unless the Contractor’s Representative is named in the Contract, the Contractor shall,
prior to the Commencement Date, submit to the Engineer for consent the name and
particulars of the person the Contractor proposes to appoint as Contractor’s Repres-
entative. If consent is withheld or subsequently revoked, or if the appointed person fails
to act as Contractor’s Representative, the Contractor shall similarly submit the name and
particulars of another suitable person for such appointment.
The Contractor shall not, without the prior consent of the Engineer, revoke the
appointment of the Contractor’s Representative or appoint a replacement.
The whole time of the Contractor’s Representative shall be given to directing the
Contractor’s performance of the Contract. If the Contractor’s Representative is to be
temporarily absent from the Site during the execution of the Works, a suitable
replacement person shall be appointed, subject to the Engineer’s prior consent, and
the Engineer shall be notified accordingly.
The Contractor’s Representative shall, on behalf of the Contractor, receive instructions
under Sub-Clause 3.3 [Instructions of the Engineer].
4.3
Contractor’s
Representative
GENERAL
CONDITIONS
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 30 =====

Conditions of Contract for Construction14
The Contractor’s Representative may delegate any powers, functions and authority
to any competent person, and may at any time revoke the delegation. Any
delegation or revocation shall not take effect until the Engineer has received prior
notice signed by the Contractor’s Representative, naming the person and
specifying the powers, functions and authority being delegated or revoked.
The Contractor’s Representative and all these persons shall be fluent in the
language for communications defined in Sub-Clause 1.4 [ Law and Language ].  
The Contractor shall not subcontract the whole of the Works.
The Contractor shall be responsible for the acts or defaults of any Subcontractor, his
agents or employees, as if they were the acts or defaults of the Contractor. Unless
otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions:
(a) the Contractor shall not be required to obtain consent to suppliers of Materials,
or to a subcontract for which the Subcontractor is named in the Contract;
(b) the prior consent of the Engineer shall be obtained to other proposed
Subcontractors;
(c) the Contractor shall give the Engineer not less than 28 days’ notice of the
intended date of the commencement of each Subcontractor’s work, and of the
commencement of such work on the Site;  and
(d) each subcontract shall include provisions which would entitle the Employer to
require the subcontract to be assigned to the Employer under Sub-Clause 4.5
[Assignment of Benefit of Subcontract] (if or when applicable) or in the event of
termination under Sub-Clause 15.2 [Termination by Employer].
If a Subcontractor’s obligations extend beyond the expiry date of the relevant Defects
Notification Period and the Engineer, prior to this date, instructs the Contractor to
assign the benefit of such obligations to the Employer, then the Contractor shall do
so. Unless otherwise stated in the assignment, the Contractor shall have no liability to
the Employer for the work carried out by the Subcontractor after the assignment
takes effect. 
The Contractor shall, as specified in the Contract or as instructed by the Engineer,
allow appropriate opportunities for carrying out work to:
(a) the Employer’s Personnel,
(b) any other contractors employed by the Employer, and
(c) the personnel of any legally constituted public authorities,
who may be employed in the execution on or near the Site of any work not included
in the Contract.
Any such instruction shall constitute a Variation if and to the extent that it causes the
Contractor to incur Unforeseeable Cost. Services for these personnel and other
contractors may include the use of Contractor’s Equipment, Temporary Works or
access arrangements which are the responsibility of the Contractor.
If, under the Contract, the Employer is required to give to the Contractor possession
of any foundation, structure, plant or means of access in accordance with
Contractor’s Documents, the Contractor shall submit such documents to the
Engineer in the time and manner stated in the Specification.
4.4
Subcontractors
4.5
Assignment of Benefit
of Subcontract
4.6
Co-operation
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 31 =====

15General Conditions
The Contractor shall set out the Works in relation to original points, lines and levels of
reference specified in the Contract or notified by the Engineer. The Contractor shall be
responsible for the correct positioning of all parts of the Works, and shall rectify any
error in the positions, levels, dimensions or alignment of the Works.
The Employer shall be responsible for any errors in these specified or notified items of
reference, but the Contractor shall use reasonable efforts to verify their accuracy
before they are used.
If the Contractor suffers delay and/or incurs Cost from executing work which was
necessitated by an error in these items of reference, and an experienced contractor
could not reasonably have discovered such error and avoided this delay and/or Cost,
the Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer and shall be entitled subject to Sub-
Clause 20.1 [Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion], and
(b) payment of any such Cost plus reasonable profit, which shall be included in the
Contract Price.
After receiving this notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine  (i) whether and (if so) to what
extent the error could not reasonably have been discovered,  and  (ii) the matters
described in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above related to this extent.  
The Contractor shall:
(a) comply with all applicable safety regulations,
(b) take care for the safety of all persons entitled to be on the Site, 
(c) use reasonable efforts to keep the Site and Works clear of unnecessary
obstruction so as to avoid danger to these persons, 
(d) provide fencing, lighting, guarding and watching of the Works until completion
and taking over under Clause 10 [ Employer’s Taking Over], and
(e) provide any Temporary Works (including roadways, footways, guards and
fences) which may be necessary, because of the execution of the Works, for
the use and protection of the public and of owners and occupiers of adjacent
land.
The Contractor shall institute a quality assurance system to demonstrate compliance with
the requirements of the Contract. The system shall be in accordance with the details
stated in the Contract. The Engineer shall be entitled to audit any aspect of the system.
Details of all procedures and compliance documents shall be submitted to the
Engineer for information before each design and execution stage is commenced.
When any document of a technical nature is issued to the Engineer, evidence of the
prior approval by the Contractor himself shall be apparent on the document itself.
Compliance with the quality assurance system shall not relieve the Contractor of any
of his duties, obligations or responsibilities under the Contract.  
The Employer shall have made available to the Contractor for his information, prior to
the Base Date, all relevant data in the Employer’s possession on sub-surface and
hydrological conditions at the Site, including environmental aspects. The Employer
4.7
Setting Out
4.8
Safety Procedures
4.9
Quality Assurance4.10
Site Data
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 32 =====

Conditions of Contract for Construction16
shall similarly make available to the Contractor all such data which come into the
Employer’s possession after the Base Date. The Contractor shall be responsible for
interpreting all such data.  
To the extent which was practicable (taking account of cost and time), the Contractor
shall be deemed to have obtained all necessary information as to risks, contingencies and
other circumstances which may influence or affect the Tender or Works. To the same
extent, the Contractor shall be deemed to have inspected and examined the Site, its
surroundings, the above data and other available information, and to have been satisfied
before submitting the Tender as to all relevant matters, including (without limitation):
(a) the form and nature of the Site, including sub-surface conditions,
(b) the hydrological and climatic conditions,
(c) the extent and nature of the work and Goods necessary for the execution and
completion of the Works and the remedying of any defects,
(d) the Laws, procedures and labour practices of the Country,  and
(e) the Contractor’s requirements for access, accommodation, facilities, personnel,
power, transport, water and other services. 
The Contractor shall be deemed to:
(a) have satisfied himself as to the correctness and sufficiency of the Accepted
Contract Amount,  and
(b) have based the Accepted Contract Amount on the data, interpretations,
necessary information, inspections, examinations and satisfaction as to all
relevant matters referred to in Sub-Clause 4.10 [ Site Data].
Unless otherwise stated in the Contract, the Accepted Contract Amount covers all the
Contractor’s obligations under the Contract (including those under Provisional Sums,
if any) and all things necessary for the proper execution and completion of the Works
and the remedying of any defects.
In this Sub-Clause, “physical conditions” means natural physical conditions and man-
made and other physical obstructions and pollutants, which the Contractor
encounters at the Site when executing the Works, including sub-surface and hydro-
logical conditions but excluding climatic conditions.
If the Contractor encounters adverse physical conditions which he considers to have been
Unforeseeable, the Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer as soon as practicable.
This notice shall describe the physical conditions, so that they can be inspected by
the Engineer, and shall set out the reasons why the Contractor considers them to be
Unforeseeable. The Contractor shall continue executing the Works, using such proper
and reasonable measures as are appropriate for the physical conditions, and shall
comply with any instructions which the Engineer may give. If an instruction constitutes
a Variation, Clause 13 [Variations and Adjustments] shall apply. 
If and to the extent that the Contractor encounters physical conditions which are Unfore-
seeable, gives such a notice, and suffers delay and/or incurs Cost due to these conditions,
the Contractor shall be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 20.1 [Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion],  and
(b) payment of any such Cost, which shall be included in the Contract Price.
4.11
Sufficiency of the 
Accepted Contract 
Amount
4.12
Unforeseeable Physical
Conditions
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 33 =====

17General Conditions
After receiving such notice and inspecting and/or investigating these physical
conditions, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5
[Determinations] to agree or determine  (i) whether and (if so) to what extent these
physical conditions were Unforeseeable, and  (ii)  the matters described in sub-
paragraphs (a) and (b) above related to this extent.
However, before additional Cost is finally agreed or determined under sub-
paragraph (ii), the Engineer may also review whether other physical conditions in
similar parts of the Works (if any) were more favourable than could reasonably have
been foreseen when the Contractor submitted the Tender. If and to the extent that
these more favourable conditions were encountered, the Engineer may proceed in
accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations] to agree or determine the
reductions in Cost which were due to these conditions, which may be included (as
deductions) in the Contract Price and Payment Certificates. However, the net effect of
all adjustments under sub-paragraph (b) and all these reductions, for all the physical
conditions encountered in similar parts of the Works, shall not result in a net reduction
in the Contract Price.
The Engineer may take account of any evidence of the physical conditions foreseen
by the Contractor when submitting the Tender, which may be made available by the
Contractor, but shall not be bound by any such evidence. 
The Contractor shall bear all costs and charges for special and/or temporary rights-
of-way which he may require, including those for access to the Site. The Contractor
shall also obtain, at his risk and cost, any additional facilities outside the Site which he
may require for the purposes of the Works.  
The Contractor shall not interfere unnecessarily or improperly with:
(a) the convenience of the public,  or
(b) the access to and use and occupation of all roads and footpaths, irres-
pective of whether they are public or in the possession of the Employer or of
others.
The Contractor shall indemnify and hold the Employer harmless against and from all
damages, losses and expenses (including legal fees and expenses) resulting from any
such unnecessary or improper interference.
The Contractor shall be deemed to have been satisfied as to the suitability and
availability of access routes to the Site. The Contractor shall use reasonable efforts to
prevent any road or bridge from being damaged by the Contractor’s traffic or by the
Contractor’s Personnel. These efforts shall include the proper use of appropriate
vehicles and routes.
Except as otherwise stated in these Conditions:
(a) the Contractor shall (as between the Parties) be responsible for any
maintenance which may be required for his use of access routes;
(b) the Contractor shall provide all necessary signs or directions along access
routes, and shall obtain any permission which may be required from the
relevant authorities for his use of routes, signs and directions;
(c) the Employer shall not be responsible for any claims which may arise from the
use or otherwise of any access route,
4.13
Rights of Way and
Facilities
4.14
Avoidance of 
Interference
4.15
Access Route
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 34 =====

Conditions of Contract for Construction18
(d) the Employer does not guarantee the suitability or availability of particular
access routes,  and
(e) Costs due to non-suitability or non-availability, for the use required by the
Contractor, of access routes shall be borne by the Contractor.  
Unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions:
(a) the Contractor shall give the Engineer not less than 21 days’ notice of the date
on which any Plant or a major item of other Goods will be delivered to the Site;
(b) the Contractor shall be responsible for packing, loading, transporting, receiving,
unloading, storing and protecting all Goods and other things required for the
Works;  and
(c) the Contractor shall indemnify and hold the Employer harmless against and
from all damages, losses and expenses (including legal fees and expenses)
resulting from the transport of Goods, and shall negotiate and pay all claims
arising from their transport.  
The Contractor shall be responsible for all Contractor’s Equipment. When brought on
to the Site, Contractor’s Equipment shall be deemed to be exclusively intended for the
execution of the Works. The Contractor shall not remove from the Site any major items
of Contractor’s Equipment without the consent of the Engineer. However, consent
shall not be required for vehicles transporting Goods or Contractor’s Personnel off
Site.
The Contractor shall take all reasonable steps to protect the environment (both on and
off the Site) and to limit damage and nuisance to people and property resulting from
pollution, noise and other results of his operations.
The Contractor shall ensure that emissions, surface discharges and effluent from the
Contractor’s activities shall not exceed the values indicated in the Specification, and
shall not exceed the values prescribed by applicable Laws.  
The Contractor shall, except as stated below, be responsible for the provision of all
power, water and other services he may require.
The Contractor shall be entitled to use for the purposes of the Works such supplies
of electricity, water, gas and other services as may be available on the Site and of
which details and prices are given in the Specification. The Contractor shall, at his risk
and cost, provide any apparatus necessary for his use of these services and for
measuring the quantities consumed.
The quantities consumed and the amounts due (at these prices) for such services
shall be agreed or determined by the Engineer in accordance with Sub-Clause 2.5
[Employer’s Claims] and Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations]. The Contractor shall pay
these amounts to the Employer.  
The Employer shall make the Employer’s Equipment (if any) available for the use of the
Contractor in the execution of the Works in accordance with the details, arrangements
and prices stated in the Specification. Unless otherwise stated in the Specification:
(a) the Employer shall be responsible for the Employer’s Equipment,  except that
4.16
Transport of Goods
4.17
Contractor’s 
Equipment
4.18
Protection of the 
Environment
4.19
Electricity, Water and 
Gas
4.20
Employer’s Equipment 
and Free-Issue Material
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 35 =====

19General Conditions
(b) the Contractor shall be responsible for each item of Employer’s Equipment
whilst any of the Contractor’s Personnel is operating it, driving it, directing it or
in possession or control of it.
The appropriate quantities and the amounts due (at such stated prices) for the use of
Employer’s Equipment shall be agreed or determined by the Engineer in accordance
with Sub-Clause 2.5 [Employer’s Claims ] and Sub-Clause 3.5 [Determinations]. The
Contractor shall pay these amounts to the Employer.
The Employer shall supply, free of charge, the “free-issue materials” (if any) in
accordance with the details stated in the Specification. The Employer shall, at his risk
and cost, provide these materials at the time and place specified in the Contract. The
Contractor shall then visually inspect them, and shall promptly give notice to the
Engineer of any shortage, defect or default in these materials. Unless otherwise
agreed by both Parties, the Employer shall immediately rectify the notified shortage,
defect or default.
After this visual inspection, the free-issue materials shall come under the care, custody
and control of the Contractor. The Contractor’s obligations of inspection, care,
custody and control shall not relieve the Employer of liability for any shortage, defect
or default not apparent from a visual inspection.  
Unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions, monthly progress reports shall be
prepared by the Contractor and submitted to the Engineer in six copies. The first
report shall cover the period up to the end of the first calendar month following the
Commencement Date. Reports shall be submitted monthly thereafter, each within 7
days after the last day of the period to which it relates.
Reporting shall continue until the Contractor has completed all work which is known to be
outstanding at the completion date stated in the Taking-Over Certificate for the Works.
Each report shall include:
(a) charts and detailed descriptions of progress, including each stage of design (if
any), Contractor’s Documents, procurement, manufacture, delivery to Site,
construction, erection and testing; and including these stages for work by each
nominated Subcontractor (as defined in Clause 5 [Nominated Subcontractors]),
(b) photographs showing the status of manufacture and of progress on the Site;
(c) for the manufacture of each main item of Plant and Materials, the name of the
manufacturer, manufacture location, percentage progress, and the actual or
expected dates of:
(i) commencement of manufacture,
(ii) Contractor’s inspections,
(iii) tests,  and
(iv) shipment and arrival at the Site;
(d) the details described in Sub-Clause 6.10 [ Records of Contractor’s Personnel
and Equipment];
(e) copies of quality assurance documents, test results and certificates of
Materials;
(f) list of notices given under Sub-Clause 2.5 [ Employer’s Claims] and notices
given under Sub-Clause 20.1 [Contractor’s Claims];
(g) safety statistics, including details of any hazardous incidents and activities
relating to environmental aspects and public relations;  and
4.21
Progress Reports
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 36 =====

Conditions of Contract for Construction20
(h) comparisons of actual and planned progress, with details of any events or
circumstances which may jeopardise the completion in accordance with the
Contract, and the measures being (or to be) adopted to overcome delays.
Unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions:
(a) the Contractor shall be responsible for keeping unauthorised persons off the
Site,  and
(b) authorised persons shall be limited to the Contractor’s Personnel and the
Employer’s Personnel; and to any other personnel notified to the Contractor, by
the Employer or the Engineer, as authorised personnel of the Employer’s other
contractors on the Site.  
The Contractor shall confine his operations to the Site, and to any additional areas
which may be obtained by the Contractor and agreed by the Engineer as working
areas. The Contractor shall take all necessary precautions to keep Contractor’s
Equipment and Contractor’s Personnel within the Site and these additional areas, and
to keep them off adjacent land.
During the execution of the Works, the Contractor shall keep the Site free from all
unnecessary obstruction, and shall store or dispose of any Contractor’s Equipment or
surplus materials. The Contractor shall clear away and remove from the Site any
wreckage, rubbish and Temporary Works which are no longer required.
Upon the issue of a Taking-Over Certificate, the Contractor shall clear away and
remove, from that part of the Site and Works to which the Taking-Over Certificate
refers, all Contractor’s Equipment, surplus material, wreckage, rubbish and Temporary
Works. The Contractor shall leave that part of the Site and the Works in a clean and
safe condition. However, the Contractor may retain on Site, during the Defects Notifi-
cation Period, such Goods as are required for the Contractor to fulfil obligations under
the Contract.
All fossils, coins, articles of value or antiquity, and structures and other remains or
items of geological or archaeological interest found on the Site shall be placed under
the care and authority of the Employer. The Contractor shall take reasonable
precautions to prevent Contractor’s Personnel or other persons from removing or
damaging any of these findings.
The Contractor shall, upon discovery of any such finding, promptly give notice to the
Engineer, who shall issue instructions for dealing with it. If the Contractor suffers delay
and/or incurs Cost from complying with the instructions, the Contractor shall give a
further notice to the Engineer and shall be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 20.1
[Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion],  and
(b) payment of any such Cost, which shall be included in the Contract Price.
After receiving this further notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine these matters.
4.22
Security of the Site
4.23
Contractor’s Operations 
on Site
4.24
Fossils
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 37 =====

21General Conditions
In the Contract, “nominated Subcontractor” means a Subcontractor:
(a) who is stated in the Contract as being a nominated Subcontractor,  or
(b) whom the Engineer, under Clause 13 [ Variations and Adjustments ], instructs
the Contractor to employ as a Subcontractor.  
The Contractor shall not be under any obligation to employ a nominated Subcontractor
against whom the Contractor raises reasonable objection by notice to the Engineer as
soon as practicable, with supporting particulars. An objection shall be deemed reasonable
if it arises from (among other things) any of the following matters, unless the Employer
agrees to indemnify the Contractor against and from the consequences of the matter:
(a) there are reasons to believe that the Subcontractor does not have sufficient
competence, resources or financial strength;
(b) the subcontract does not specify that the nominated Subcontractor shall
indemnify the Contractor against and from any negligence or misuse of Goods
by the nominated Subcontractor, his agents and employees;  or
(c) the subcontract does not specify that, for the subcontracted work (including
design, if any), the nominated Subcontractor shall:
(i) undertake to the Contractor such obligations and liabilities as will enable
the Contractor to discharge his obligations and liabilities under the
Contract, and
(ii) indemnify the Contractor against and from all obligations and liabilities
arising under or in connection with the Contract and from the
consequences of any failure by the Subcontractor to perform these
obligations or to fulfil these liabilities.  
The Contractor shall pay to the nominated Subcontractor the amounts which the
Engineer certifies to be due in accordance with the subcontract. These amounts plus
other charges shall be included in the Contract Price in accordance with sub-
paragraph (b) of Sub-Clause 13.5 [ Provisional Sums], except as stated in Sub-
Clause 5.4 [Evidence of Payments].  
Before issuing a Payment Certificate which includes an amount payable to a
nominated Subcontractor, the Engineer may request the Contractor to supply
reasonable evidence that the nominated Subcontractor has received all amounts due
in accordance with previous Payment Certificates, less applicable deductions for
retention or otherwise. Unless the Contractor:
(a) submits this reasonable evidence to the Engineer,  or
(b) (i) satisfies the Engineer in writing that the Contractor is reasonably
entitled to withhold or refuse to pay these amounts,  and
(ii) submits to the Engineer reasonable evidence that the nominated
Subcontractor has been notified of the Contractor’s entitlement,
then the Employer may (at his sole discretion) pay, direct to the nominated
Subcontractor, part or all of such amounts previously certified (less applicable
5.1
Definition of “nominated 
Subcontractor”
5.2
Objection to Nomination
5.3
Payments to nominated
Subcontractors
5.4
Evidence of Payments
5Nominated Subcontractors
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 38 =====

22 Conditions of Contract for Construction
6.1
Engagement of 
Staff and Labour
6.2
Rates of Wages and
Conditions of Labour
6.3
Persons in the Service
of Employer
6.4
Labour Laws
6.5
Working Hours
6.6
Facilities for Staff
and Labour
6.7
Health and Safety
deductions) as are due to the nominated Subcontractor and for which the Contractor
has failed to submit the evidence described in sub-paragraphs (a) or (b) above. The
Contractor shall then repay, to the Employer, the amount which the nominated Sub-
contractor was directly paid by the Employer.  
Except as otherwise stated in the Specification, the Contractor shall make
arrangements for the engagement of all staff and labour, local or otherwise, and for
their payment, housing, feeding and transport.  
The Contractor shall pay rates of wages, and observe conditions of labour, which are not
lower than those established for the trade or industry where the work is carried out. If no
established rates or conditions are applicable, the Contractor shall pay rates of wages and
observe conditions which are not lower than the general level of wages and conditions
observed locally by employers whose trade or industry is similar to that of the Contractor.
The Contractor shall not recruit, or attempt to recruit, staff and labour from amongst
the Employer’s Personnel.  
The Contractor shall comply with all the relevant labour Laws applicable to the
Contractor’s Personnel, including Laws relating to their employment, health, safety,
welfare, immigration and emigration, and shall allow them all their legal rights.
The Contractor shall require his employees to obey all applicable Laws, including
those concerning safety at work.  
No work shall be carried out on the Site on locally recognised days of rest, or outside
the normal working hours stated in the Appendix to Tender, unless:
(a) otherwise stated in the Contract,
(b) the Engineer gives consent,  or
(c) the work is unavoidable, or necessary for the protection of life or property or for
the safety of the Works, in which case the Contractor shall immediately advise
the Engineer.  
Except as otherwise stated in the Specification, the Contractor shall provide and
maintain all necessary accommodation and welfare facilities for the Contractor’s
Personnel. The Contractor shall also provide facilities for the Employer’s Personnel as
stated in the Specification.
The Contractor shall not permit any of the Contractor’s Personnel to maintain any
temporary or permanent living quarters within the structures forming part of the
Permanent Works.  
The Contractor shall at all times take all reasonable precautions to maintain the health
and safety of the Contractor’s Personnel. In collaboration with local health authorities,
6Staff and Labour
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 39 =====

23General Conditions
the Contractor shall ensure that medical staff, first aid facilities, sick bay and
ambulance service are available at all times at the Site and at any accommodation for
Contractor’s and Employer’s Personnel, and that suitable arrangements are made for
all necessary welfare and hygiene requirements and for the prevention of epidemics.
The Contractor shall appoint an accident prevention officer at the Site, responsible for
maintaining safety and protection against accidents. This person shall be qualified for
this responsibility, and shall have the authority to issue instructions and take protective
measures to prevent accidents. Throughout the execution of the Works, the
Contractor shall provide whatever is required by this person to exercise this
responsibility and authority.
The Contractor shall send, to the Engineer, details of any accident as soon as
practicable after its occurrence. The Contractor shall maintain records and make
reports concerning health, safety and welfare of persons, and damage to property, as
the Engineer may reasonably require.  
Throughout the execution of the Works, and as long thereafter as is necessary to fulfil
the Contractor’s obligations, the Contractor shall provide all necessary super-
intendence to plan, arrange, direct, manage, inspect and test the work.
Superintendence shall be given by a sufficient number of persons having adequate
knowledge of the language for communications (defined in Sub-Clause 1.4 [ Law and
Language]) and of the operations to be carried out (including the methods and
techniques required, the hazards likely to be encountered and methods of preventing
accidents), for the satisfactory and safe execution of the Works.
The Contractor’s Personnel shall be appropriately qualified, skilled and experienced in
their respective trades or occupations. The Engineer may require the Contractor to
remove (or cause to be removed) any person employed on the Site or Works,
including the Contractor’s Representative if applicable, who:
(a) persists in any misconduct or lack of care,
(b) carries out duties incompetently or negligently,
(c) fails to conform with any provisions of the Contract, or
(d) persists in any conduct which is prejudicial to safety, health, or the protection
of the environment.
If appropriate, the Contractor shall then appoint (or cause to be appointed) a suitable
replacement person. 
The Contractor shall submit, to the Engineer, details showing the number of each
class of Contractor’s Personnel and of each type of Contractor’s Equipment on the
Site. Details shall be submitted each calendar month, in a form approved by the
Engineer, until the Contractor has completed all work which is known to be
outstanding at the completion date stated in the Taking-Over Certificate for the
Works.
The Contractor shall at all times take all reasonable precautions to prevent any
unlawful, riotous or disorderly conduct by or amongst the Contractor’s Personnel,
and to preserve peace and protection of persons and property on and near the
Site.
6.8
Contractor’s 
Superintendence
6.9
Contractor’s
Personnel
6.10
Records of Contractor’s 
Personnel and 
Equipment
6.11
Disorderly Conduct
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 40 =====

24 Conditions of Contract for Construction
The Contractor shall carry out the manufacture of Plant, the production and
manufacture of Materials, and all other execution of the Works:  
(a) in the manner (if any) specified in the Contract,
(b) in a proper workmanlike and careful manner, in accordance with recognised
good practice,  and
(c) with properly equipped facilities and non-hazardous Materials, except as
otherwise specified in the Contract. 
The Contractor shall submit the following samples of Materials, and relevant
information, to the Engineer for consent prior to using the Materials in or for the Works:
(a) manufacturer’s standard samples of Materials and samples specified in the
Contract, all at the Contractor’s cost, and
(b) additional samples instructed by the Engineer as a Variation.
Each sample shall be labelled as to origin and intended use in the Works.
The Employer’s Personnel shall at all reasonable times:
(a) have full access to all parts of the Site and to all places from which natural
Materials are being obtained,  and
(b) during production, manufacture and construction (at the Site and elsewhere),
be entitled to examine, inspect, measure and test the materials and
workmanship, and to check the progress of manufacture of Plant and
production and manufacture of Materials.
The Contractor shall give the Employer’s Personnel full opportunity to carry out
these activities, including providing access, facilities, permissions and safety
equipment. No such activity shall relieve the Contractor from any obligation or
responsibility.
The Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer whenever any work is ready and
before it is covered up, put out of sight, or packaged for storage or transport. The
Engineer shall then either carry out the examination, inspection, measurement or
testing without unreasonable delay, or promptly give notice to the Contractor that the
Engineer does not require to do so. If the Contractor fails to give the notice, he shall,
if and when required by the Engineer, uncover the work and thereafter reinstate and
make good, all at the Contractor’s cost.  
This Sub-Clause shall apply to all tests specified in the Contract, other than the Tests
after Completion (if any).
The Contractor shall provide all apparatus, assistance, documents and other
information, electricity, equipment, fuel, consumables, instruments, labour,
materials, and suitably qualified and experienced staff, as are necessary to carry out
the specified tests efficiently. The Contractor shall agree, with the Engineer, the time
and place for the specified testing of any Plant, Materials and other parts of the
Works.
7.1 
Manner of Execution
7.2
Samples
7.3
Inspection
7.4
Testing
7Plant, Materials and Workmanship
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 41 =====

25General Conditions
The Engineer may, under Clause 13 [Variations and Adjustments], vary the location or
details of specified tests, or instruct the Contractor to carry out additional tests. If these
varied or additional tests show that the tested Plant, Materials or workmanship is not
in accordance with the Contract, the cost of carrying out this Variation shall be borne
by the Contractor, notwithstanding other provisions of the Contract.
The Engineer shall give the Contractor not less than 24 hours’ notice of the Engineer’s
intention to attend the tests. If the Engineer does not attend at the time and place
agreed, the Contractor may proceed with the tests, unless otherwise instructed by the
Engineer, and the tests shall then be deemed to have been made in the Engineer’s
presence.
If the Contractor suffers delay and/or incurs Cost from complying with these
instructions or as a result of a delay for which the Employer is responsible, the
Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer and shall be entitled subject to Sub-
Clause 20.1 [Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion], and
(b) payment of any such Cost plus reasonable profit, which shall be included in the
Contract Price.
After receiving this notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine these matters. 
The Contractor shall promptly forward to the Engineer duly certified reports of the tests.
When the specified tests have been passed, the Engineer shall endorse the Contractor’s
test certificate, or issue a certificate to him, to that effect. If the Engineer has not
attended the tests, he shall be deemed to have accepted the readings as accurate.
If, as a result of an examination, inspection, measurement or testing, any Plant,
Materials or workmanship is found to be defective or otherwise not in accordance with
the Contract, the Engineer may reject the Plant, Materials or workmanship by giving
notice to the Contractor, with reasons. The Contractor shall then promptly make good
the defect and ensure that the rejected item complies with the Contract.
If the Engineer requires this Plant, Materials or workmanship to be retested, the tests
shall be repeated under the same terms and conditions. If the rejection and retesting
cause the Employer to incur additional costs, the Contractor shall subject to Sub-
Clause 2.5 [Employer’s Claims] pay these costs to the Employer. 
Notwithstanding any previous test or certification, the Engineer may instruct the
Contractor to:
(a) remove from the Site and replace any Plant or Materials which is not in
accordance with the Contract,
(b) remove and re-execute any other work which is not in accordance with the
Contract,  and
(c) execute any work which is urgently required for the safety of the Works,
whether because of an accident, unforeseeable event or otherwise.
The Contractor shall comply with the instruction within a reasonable time, which shall
be the time (if any) specified in the instruction, or immediately if urgency is specified
under sub-paragraph (c).
7.5
Rejection
7.6
Remedial Work
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 42 =====

26 Conditions of Contract for Construction
If the Contractor fails to comply with the instruction, the Employer shall be entitled to
employ and pay other persons to carry out the work. Except to the extent that the
Contractor would have been entitled to payment for the work, the Contractor shall
subject to Sub-Clause 2.5 [ Employer’s Claims] pay to the Employer all costs arising
from this failure.
Each item of Plant and Materials shall, to the extent consistent with the Laws of the
Country, become the property of the Employer at whichever is the earlier of the
following times, free from liens and other encumbrances:  
(a) when it is delivered to the Site;
(b) when the Contractor is entitled to payment of the value of the Plant and
Materials under Sub-Clause 8.10 [ Payment for Plant and Materials in Event of
Suspension].
Unless otherwise stated in the Specification, the Contractor shall pay all royalties,
rents and other payments for:
(a) natural Materials obtained from outside the Site,  and
(b) the disposal of material from demolitions and excavations and of other surplus
material (whether natural or man-made), except to the extent that disposal
areas within the Site are specified in the Contract.
The Engineer shall give the Contractor not less than 7 days’ notice of the
Commencement Date. Unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions, the
Commencement Date shall be within 42 days after the Contractor receives the Letter
of Acceptance.
The Contractor shall commence the execution of the Works as soon as is reasonably
practicable after the Commencement Date, and shall then proceed with the Works
with due expedition and without delay.  
The Contractor shall complete the whole of the Works, and each Section (if any),
within the Time for Completion for the Works or Section (as the case may be),
including:
(a) achieving the passing of the Tests on Completion,  and
(b) completing all work which is stated in the Contract as being required for the
Works or Section to be considered to be completed for the purposes of taking-
over under Sub-Clause 10.1 [Taking Over of the Works and Sections].  
The Contractor shall submit a detailed time programme to the Engineer within 28 days
after receiving the notice under Sub-Clause 8.1 [ Commencement of Works]. The
Contractor shall also submit a revised programme whenever the previous programme
is inconsistent with actual progress or with the Contractor’s obligations. Each
programme shall include:
7.7
Ownership of Plant and 
Materials 
7.8
Royalties
8.1
Commencement of Works
8.2
Time for Completion
8.3
Programme
8Commencement, Delays and Suspension
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 43 =====

27General Conditions
(a) the order in which the Contractor intends to carry out the Works, including the
anticipated timing of each stage of design (if any), Contractor’s Documents,
procurement, manufacture of Plant, delivery to Site, construction, erection and
testing,
(b) each of these stages for work by each nominated Subcontractor (as defined in
Clause 5 [Nominated Subcontractors]),
(c) the sequence and timing of inspections and tests specified in the Contract,
and
(d) a supporting report which includes:
(i) a general description of the methods which the Contractor intends to
adopt, and of the major stages, in the execution of the Works,  and
(ii) details showing the Contractor’s reasonable estimate of the number of
each class of Contractor’s Personnel and of each type of Contractor’s
Equipment, required on the Site for each major stage.
Unless the Engineer, within 21 days after receiving a programme, gives notice to the
Contractor stating the extent to which it does not comply with the Contract, the
Contractor shall proceed in accordance with the programme, subject to his other
obligations under the Contract. The Employer’s Personnel shall be entitled to rely upon
the programme when planning their activities.
The Contractor shall promptly give notice to the Engineer of specific probable future
events or circumstances which may adversely affect the work, increase the Contract
Price or delay the execution of the Works. The Engineer may require the Contractor
to submit an estimate of the anticipated effect of the future event or circumstances,
and/or a proposal under Sub-Clause 13.3 [ Variation Procedure].
If, at any time, the Engineer gives notice to the Contractor that a programme fails (to
the extent stated) to comply with the Contract or to be consistent with actual progress
and the Contractor’s stated intentions, the Contractor shall submit a revised
programme to the Engineer in accordance with this Sub-Clause.
The Contractor shall be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 20.1 [ Contractor’s Claims] to
an extension of the Time for Completion if and to the extent that completion for the
purposes of Sub-Clause 10.1 [Taking Over of the Works and Sections ] is or will be
delayed by any of the following causes:
(a) a Variation (unless an adjustment to the Time for Completion has been agreed
under Sub-Clause 13.3 [Variation Procedure]) or other substantial change in the
quantity of an item of work included in the Contract,
(b) a cause of delay giving an entitlement to extension of time under a Sub-Clause
of these Conditions,
(c) exceptionally adverse climatic conditions,
(d) Unforeseeable shortages in the availability of personnel or Goods caused by
epidemic or governmental actions,  or
(e) any delay, impediment or prevention caused by or attributable to the
Employer, the Employer’s Personnel, or the Employer’s other contractors on
the Site.
If the Contractor considers himself to be entitled to an extension of the Time for
Completion, the Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer in accordance with Sub-
Clause 20.1 [ Contractor’s Claims]. When determining each extension of time under
Sub-Clause 20.1, the Engineer shall review previous determinations and may
increase, but shall not decrease, the total extension of time.  
8.4
Extension of Time for 
Completion
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 44 =====

28 Conditions of Contract for Construction
If the following conditions apply, namely:
(a) the Contractor has diligently followed the procedures laid down by the relevant
legally constituted public authorities in the Country,
(b) these authorities delay or disrupt the Contractor’s work,  and
(c) the delay or disruption was Unforeseeable,
then this delay or disruption will be considered as a cause of delay under sub-
paragraph (b) of Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion].  
If, at any time:
(a) actual progress is too slow to complete within the Time for Completion,  and/or
(b) progress has fallen (or will fall) behind the current programme under Sub-
Clause 8.3 [Programme],
other than as a result of a cause listed in Sub-Clause 8.4 [ Extension of Time for
Completion], then the Engineer may instruct the Contractor to submit, under Sub-
Clause 8.3 [Programme], a revised programme and supporting report describing the
revised methods which the Contractor proposes to adopt in order to expedite
progress and complete within the Time for Completion.
Unless the Engineer notifies otherwise, the Contractor shall adopt these revised
methods, which may require increases in the working hours and/or in the numbers of
Contractor’s Personnel and/or Goods, at the risk and cost of the Contractor. If these
revised methods cause the Employer to incur additional costs, the Contractor shall
subject to Sub-Clause 2.5 [Employer’s Claims ] pay these costs to the Employer, in
addition to delay damages (if any) under Sub-Clause 8.7 below.  
If the Contractor fails to comply with Sub-Clause 8.2 [ Time for Completion], the
Contractor shall subject to Sub-Clause 2.5 [ Employer’s Claims ] pay delay
damages to the Employer for this default. These delay damages shall be the sum
stated in the Appendix to Tender, which shall be paid for every day which shall
elapse between the relevant Time for Completion and the date stated in the
Taking-Over Certificate. However, the total amount due under this Sub-Clause
shall not exceed the maximum amount of delay damages (if any) stated in the
Appendix to Tender.
These delay damages shall be the only damages due from the Contractor for
such default, other than in the event of termination under Sub-Clause 15.2
[Termination by Employer ] prior to completion of the Works. These damages shall
not relieve the Contractor from his obligation to complete the Works, or from any
other duties, obligations or responsibilities which he may have under the
Contract.
The Engineer may at any time instruct the Contractor to suspend progress of
part or all of the Works. During such suspension, the Contractor shall protect,
store and secure such part or the Works against any deterioration, loss or
damage.
The Engineer may also notify the cause for the suspension. If and to the extent that
the cause is notified and is the responsibility of the Contractor, the following Sub-
Clauses 8.9, 8.10 and 8.11 shall not apply.  
8.5
Delays Caused by 
Authorities
8.6
Rate of Progress
8.7
Delay Damages
8.8
Suspension of Work
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 45 =====

29General Conditions
If the Contractor suffers delay and/or incurs Cost from complying with the Engineer’s
instructions under Sub-Clause 8.8 [ Suspension of Work] and/or from resuming the
work, the Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer and shall be entitled subject to
Sub-Clause 20.1 [Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion], and
(b) payment of any such Cost, which shall be included in the Contract Price.
After receiving this notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine these matters.
The Contractor shall not be entitled to an extension of time for, or to payment of the
Cost incurred in, making good the consequences of the Contractor’s faulty design,
workmanship or materials, or of the Contractor’s failure to protect, store or secure in
accordance with Sub-Clause 8.8 [Suspension of Work].  
The Contractor shall be entitled to payment of the value (as at the date of suspension)
of Plant and/or Materials which have not been delivered to Site, if:
(a) the work on Plant or delivery of Plant and/or Materials has been suspended for
more than 28 days,  and
(b) the Contractor has marked the Plant and/or Materials as the Employer’s
property in accordance with the Engineer’s instructions. 
If the suspension under Sub-Clause 8.8 [Suspension of Work] has continued for more
than 84 days, the Contractor may request the Engineer’s permission to proceed. If the
Engineer does not give permission within 28 days after being requested to do so, the
Contractor may, by giving notice to the Engineer, treat the suspension as an omission
under Clause 13 [Variations and Adjustments] of the affected part of the Works. If the
suspension affects the whole of the Works, the Contractor may give notice of
termination under Sub-Clause 16.2 [Termination by Contractor].
After the permission or instruction to proceed is given, the Contractor and the
Engineer shall jointly examine the Works and the Plant and Materials affected by the
suspension. The Contractor shall make good any deterioration or defect in or loss of
the Works or Plant or Materials, which has occurred during the suspension.  
The Contractor shall carry out the Tests on Completion in accordance with this
Clause and Sub-Clause 7.4 [Testing ], after providing the documents in accordance
with sub-paragraph (d) of Sub-Clause 4.1 [ Contractor’s General Obligations].
The Contractor shall give to the Engineer not less than 21 days’ notice of the date
after which the Contractor will be ready to carry out each of the Tests on
Completion. Unless otherwise agreed, Tests on Completion shall be carried out
within 14 days after this date, on such day or days as the Engineer shall instruct.
In considering the results of the Tests on Completion, the Engineer shall make
9Tests on Completion
8.9
Consequences of 
Suspension
8.10
Payment for Plant and 
Materials in Event of 
Suspension
8.11
Prolonged Suspension
8.12
Resumption of Work
9.1
Contractor’s Obligations
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 46 =====

Conditions of Contract for Construction30
If the Tests on Completion are being unduly delayed by the Contractor, the Engineer
may by notice require the Contractor to carry out the Tests within 21 days after
receiving the notice. The Contractor shall carry out the Tests on such day or days within
that period as the Contractor may fix and of which he shall give notice to the Engineer.
If the Contractor fails to carry out the Tests on Completion within the period of
21 days, the Employer’s Personnel may proceed with the Tests at the risk and cost of
the Contractor. The Tests on Completion shall then be deemed to have been carried
out in the presence of the Contractor and the results of the Tests shall be accepted
as accurate. 
If the Works, or a Section, fail to pass the Tests on Completion, Sub-Clause 7.5
[Rejection] shall apply, and the Engineer or the Contractor may require the failed Tests,
and Tests on Completion on any related work, to be repeated under the same terms
and conditions.  
If the Works, or a Section, fail to pass the Tests on Completion repeated under Sub-
Clause 9.3 [Retesting], the Engineer shall be entitled to:
(a) order further repetition of Tests on Completion under Sub-Clause 9.3;
(b) if the failure deprives the Employer of substantially the whole benefit of the
Works or Section, reject the Works or Section (as the case may be), in which
event the Employer shall have the same remedies as are provided in sub-
paragraph (c) of Sub-Clause 11.4 [Failure to Remedy Defects];  or
(c) issue a Taking-Over Certificate, if the Employer so requests.
In the event of sub-paragraph (c), the Contractor shall proceed in accordance with all
other obligations under the Contract, and the Contract Price shall be reduced by such
amount as shall be appropriate to cover the reduced value to the Employer as a result
of this failure. Unless the relevant reduction for this failure is stated (or its method of
calculation is defined) in the Contract, the Employer may require the reduction to be
(i) agreed by both Parties (in full satisfaction of this failure only) and paid before this
Taking-Over Certificate is issued, or  (ii) determined and paid under Sub-Clause 2.5
[Employer’s Claims] and Sub-Clause 3.5 [Determinations].  
Except as stated in Sub-Clause 9.4 [Failure to Pass Tests on Completion], the Works
shall be taken over by the Employer when (i) the Works have been completed in
accordance with the Contract, including the matters described in Sub-Clause 8.2
[Time for Completion ] and except as allowed in sub-paragraph (a) below,  and (ii) a
9.3
Retesting
9.4
Failure to Pass Tests on 
Completion
10.1
Taking Over of the 
Works and Sections
10Employer’s Taking Over
allowances for the effect of any use of the Works by the Employer on the performance
or other characteristics of the Works. As soon as the Works, or a Section, have
passed any Tests on Completion, the Contractor shall submit a certified report of the
results of these Tests to the Engineer. 
If the Tests on Completion are being unduly delayed by the Employer, Sub-Clause 7.4
[Testing] (fifth paragraph) and/or Sub-Clause 10.3 [ Interference with Tests on
Completion] shall be applicable.
9.2
Delayed Tests
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 47 =====

31General Conditions
Taking-Over Certificate for the Works has been issued, or is deemed to have been
issued in accordance with this Sub-Clause.
The Contractor may apply by notice to the Engineer for a Taking-Over Certificate not
earlier than 14 days before the Works will, in the Contractor’s opinion, be complete
and ready for taking over. If the Works are divided into Sections, the Contractor may
similarly apply for a Taking-Over Certificate for each Section.
The Engineer shall, within 28 days after receiving the Contractor’s application:
(a) issue the Taking-Over Certificate to the Contractor, stating the date on which
the Works or Section were completed in accordance with the Contract, except
for any minor outstanding work and defects which will not substantially affect
the use of the Works or Section for their intended purpose (either until or whilst
this work is completed and these defects are remedied);  or
(b) reject the application, giving reasons and specifying the work required to be
done by the Contractor to enable the Taking-Over Certificate to be issued. The
Contractor shall then complete this work before issuing a further notice under
this Sub-Clause.
If the Engineer fails either to issue the Taking-Over Certificate or to reject the
Contractor’s application within the period of 28 days, and if the Works or Section
(as the case may be) are substantially in accordance with the Contract, the Taking-
Over Certificate shall be deemed to have been issued on the last day of that
period.  
The Engineer may, at the sole discretion of the Employer, issue a Taking-Over
Certificate for any part of the Permanent Works.
The Employer shall not use any part of the Works (other than as a temporary
measure which is either specified in the Contract or agreed by both Parties) unless
and until the Engineer has issued a Taking-Over Certificate for this part. However, if
the Employer does use any part of the Works before the Taking-Over Certificate is
issued:
(a) the part which is used shall be deemed to have been taken over as from the
date on which it is used,
(b) the Contractor shall cease to be liable for the care of such part as from this
date, when responsibility shall pass to the Employer,  and
(c) if requested by the Contractor, the Engineer shall issue a Taking-Over
Certificate for this part.
After the Engineer has issued a Taking-Over Certificate for a part of the Works, the
Contractor shall be given the earliest opportunity to take such steps as may be
necessary to carry out any outstanding Tests on Completion. The Contractor shall
carry out these Tests on Completion as soon as practicable before the expiry date of
the relevant Defects Notification Period.
If the Contractor incurs Cost as a result of the Employer taking over and/or using a
part of the Works, other than such use as is specified in the Contract or agreed by the
Contractor, the Contractor shall  (i) give notice to the Engineer and  (ii) be entitled
subject to Sub-Clause 20.1 [ Contractor’s Claims] to payment of any such Cost plus
reasonable profit, which shall be included in the Contract Price. After receiving this
notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5
[Determinations] to agree or determine this Cost and profit.
10.2
Taking Over
of Parts of the Works
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 48 =====

Conditions of Contract for Construction32
If a Taking-Over Certificate has been issued for a part of the Works (other than a
Section), the delay damages thereafter for completion of the remainder of the Works
shall be reduced. Similarly, the delay damages for the remainder of the Section (if any)
in which this part is included shall also be reduced. For any period of delay after the
date stated in this Taking-Over Certificate, the proportional reduction in these delay
damages shall be calculated as the proportion which the value of the part so certified
bears to the value of the Works or Section (as the case may be) as a whole. The
Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations] to agree
or determine these proportions. The provisions of this paragraph shall only apply to the
daily rate of delay damages under Sub-Clause 8.7 [ Delay Damages], and shall not
affect the maximum amount of these damages.
If the Contractor is prevented, for more than 14 days, from carrying out the Tests on
Completion by a cause for which the Employer is responsible, the Employer shall be
deemed to have taken over the Works or Section (as the case may be) on the date
when the Tests on Completion would otherwise have been completed.
The Engineer shall then issue a Taking-Over Certificate accordingly, and the
Contractor shall carry out the Tests on Completion as soon as practicable, before the
expiry date of the Defects Notification Period. The Engineer shall require the Tests on
Completion to be carried out by giving 14 days’ notice and in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Contract.
If the Contractor suffers delay and/or incurs Cost as a result of this delay in carrying
out the Tests on Completion, the Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer and shall
be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 20.1 [ Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion], and
(b) payment of any such Cost plus reasonable profit, which shall be included in the
Contract Price.
After receiving this notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine these matters.  
Except as otherwise stated in a Taking-Over Certificate, a certificate for a Section or
part of the Works shall not be deemed to certify completion of any ground or other
surfaces requiring reinstatement.  
In order that the Works and Contractor’s Documents, and each Section, shall be in
the condition required by the Contract (fair wear and tear excepted) by the expiry date
of the relevant Defects Notification Period or as soon as practicable thereafter, the
Contractor shall:  
(a) complete any work which is outstanding on the date stated in a Taking-Over
Certificate, within such reasonable time as is instructed by the Engineer, and
(b) execute all work required to remedy defects or damage, as may be notified by
(or on behalf of) the Employer on or before the expiry date of the Defects
Notification Period for the Works or Section (as the case may be).
10.3
Interference with Tests on
Completion
10.4
Surfaces Requiring 
Reinstatement
11.1
Completion of 
Outstanding Work and 
Remedying Defects
11Defects Liability
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 49 =====

33General Conditions
If a defect appears or damage occurs, the Contractor shall be notified accordingly, by
(or on behalf of) the Employer.  
All work referred to in sub-paragraph (b) of Sub-Clause 11.1 [ Completion of
Outstanding Work and Remedying Defects ] shall be executed at the risk and cost of
the Contractor, if and to the extent that the work is attributable to:
(a) any design for which the Contractor is responsible,
(b) Plant, Materials or workmanship not being in accordance with the
Contract, or
(c) failure by the Contractor to comply with any other obligation.
If and to the extent that such work is attributable to any other cause, the Contractor
shall be notified promptly by (or on behalf of) the Employer, and Sub-Clause 13.3
[Variation Procedure] shall apply.  
The Employer shall be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 2.5 [ Employer’s Claims] to an
extension of the Defects Notification Period for the Works or a Section if and to the
extent that the Works, Section or a major item of Plant (as the case may be, and after
taking over) cannot be used for the purposes for which they are intended by reason
of a defect or damage. However, a Defects Notification Period shall not be extended
by more than two years.
If delivery and/or erection of Plant and/or Materials was suspended under Sub-
Clause 8.8 [Suspension of Work ] or Sub-Clause 16.1 [ Contractor’s Entitlement to
Suspend Work], the Contractor’s obligations under this Clause shall not apply to any
defects or damage occurring more than two years after the Defects Notification Period
for the Plant and/or Materials would otherwise have expired.  
If the Contractor fails to remedy any defect or damage within a reasonable time, a
date may be fixed by (or on behalf of) the Employer, on or by which the defect or
damage is to be remedied. The Contractor shall be given reasonable notice of this
date.
If the Contractor fails to remedy the defect or damage by this notified date and this
remedial work was to be executed at the cost of the Contractor under Sub-
Clause 11.2 [Cost of Remedying Defects ], the Employer may (at his option):
(a) carry out the work himself or by others, in a reasonable manner and at the
Contractor’s cost, but the Contractor shall have no responsibility for this work;
and the Contractor shall subject to Sub-Clause 2.5 [ Employer’s Claims] pay to
the Employer the costs reasonably incurred by the Employer in remedying the
defect or damage;
(b) require the Engineer to agree or determine a reasonable reduction in the
Contract Price in accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations];  or
(c) if the defect or damage deprives the Employer of substantially the whole
benefit of the Works or any major part of the Works, terminate the Contract as
a whole, or in respect of such major part which cannot be put to the intended
use. Without prejudice to any other rights, under the Contract or otherwise,
the Employer shall then be entitled to recover all sums paid for the Works or
for such part (as the case may be), plus financing costs and the cost of
dismantling the same, clearing the Site and returning Plant and Materials to
the Contractor.  
11.2
Cost of Remedying 
Defects
11.3
Extension of Defects 
Notification Period
11.4
Failure to Remedy 
Defects
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 50 =====

Conditions of Contract for Construction34
If the defect or damage cannot be remedied expeditiously on the Site and the
Employer gives consent, the Contractor may remove from the Site for the purposes
of repair such items of Plant as are defective or damaged. This consent may require
the Contractor to increase the amount of the Performance Security by the full
replacement cost of these items, or to provide other appropriate security.  
If the work of remedying of any defect or damage may affect the performance of the
Works, the Engineer may require the repetition of any of the tests described in the
Contract. The requirement shall be made by notice within 28 days after the defect or
damage is remedied.
These tests shall be carried out in accordance with the terms applicable to the
previous tests, except that they shall be carried out at the risk and cost of the Party
liable, under Sub-Clause 11.2 [ Cost of Remedying Defects ], for the cost of the
remedial work.  
Until the Performance Certificate has been issued, the Contractor shall have such right
of access to the Works as is reasonably required in order to comply with this Clause,
except as may be inconsistent with the Employer’s reasonable security restrictions.
The Contractor shall, if required by the Engineer, search for the cause of any defect,
under the direction of the Engineer. Unless the defect is to be remedied at the cost of
the Contractor under Sub-Clause 11.2 [Cost of Remedying Defects ], the Cost of the
search plus reasonable profit shall be agreed or determined by the Engineer in
accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations] and shall be included in the
Contract Price.  
Performance of the Contractor’s obligations shall not be considered to have been
completed until the Engineer has issued the Performance Certificate to the Contractor,
stating the date on which the Contractor completed his obligations under the Contract.
The Engineer shall issue the Performance Certificate within 28 days after the latest of
the expiry dates of the Defects Notification Periods, or as soon thereafter as the
Contractor has supplied all the Contractor’s Documents and completed and tested all
the Works, including remedying any defects. A copy of the Performance Certificate
shall be issued to the Employer.
Only the Performance Certificate shall be deemed to constitute acceptance of the Works.
After the Performance Certificate has been issued, each Party shall remain liable for
the fulfilment of any obligation which remains unperformed at that time. For the
purposes of determining the nature and extent of unperformed obligations, the
Contract shall be deemed to remain in force.  
Upon receiving the Performance Certificate, the Contractor shall remove any
remaining Contractor’s Equipment, surplus material, wreckage, rubbish and
Temporary Works from the Site.
If all these items have not been removed within 28 days after the Employer
receives a copy of the Performance Certificate, the Employer may sell or
11.5
Removal of Defective 
Work
11.6
Further Tests
11.7
Right of Access
11.8
Contractor to Search
11.9
Performance Certificate11.10
Unfulfilled Obligations
11.11
Clearance of Site
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 51 =====

35General Conditions
otherwise dispose of any remaining items. The Employer shall be entitled to be
paid the costs incurred in connection with, or attributable to, such sale or disposal
and restoring the Site.
Any balance of the moneys from the sale shall be paid to the Contractor. If these
moneys are less than the Employer’s costs, the Contractor shall pay the outstanding
balance to the Employer. 
The Works shall be measured, and valued for payment, in accordance with this Clause. 
Whenever the Engineer requires any part of the Works to be measured, reasonable
notice shall be given to the Contractor’s Representative, who shall:
(a) promptly either attend or send another qualified representative to assist the
Engineer in making the measurement, and
(b) supply any particulars requested by the Engineer.
If the Contractor fails to attend or send a representative, the measurement made by
(or on behalf of) the Engineer shall be accepted as accurate.
Except as otherwise stated in the Contract, wherever any Permanent Works are to be
measured from records, these shall be prepared by the Engineer. The Contractor shall,
as and when requested, attend to examine and agree the records with the Engineer,
and shall sign the same when agreed. If the Contractor does not attend, the records
shall be accepted as accurate.
If the Contractor examines and disagrees the records, and/or does not sign them as
agreed, then the Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer of the respects in which
the records are asserted to be inaccurate. After receiving this notice, the Engineer
shall review the records and either confirm or vary them. If the Contractor does not so
give notice to the Engineer within 14 days after being requested to examine the
records, they shall be accepted as accurate.  
Except as otherwise stated in the Contract and notwithstanding local practice:
(a) measurement shall be made of the net actual quantity of each item of the
Permanent Works,  and
(b) the method of measurement shall be in accordance with the Bill of Quantities
or other applicable Schedules.  
Except as otherwise stated in the Contract, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance
with Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations] to agree or determine the Contract Price by
evaluating each item of work, applying the measurement agreed or determined in
accordance with the above Sub-Clauses 12.1 and 12.2 and the appropriate rate or
price for the item.
For each item of work, the appropriate rate or price for the item shall be the rate or
price specified for such item in the Contract or, if there is no such item, specified for
similar work. However, a new rate or price shall be appropriate for an item of work if:
12.1
Works to be Measured
12.2
Method of Measurement
12.3
Evaluation
12Measurement and Evaluation
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 52 =====

12.4
Omissions
13.1
Right to Vary
(a) (i) the measured quantity of the item is changed by more than 10% from
the quantity of this item in the Bill of Quantities or other Schedule,
(ii) this change in quantity multiplied by such specified rate for this item
exceeds 0.01% of the Accepted Contract Amount,
(iii) this change in quantity directly changes the Cost per unit quantity of
this item by more than 1%,  and
(iv) this item is not specified in the Contract as a “fixed rate item”;
or
(b) (i) the work is instructed under Clause 13 [ Variations and Adjustments],
(ii) no rate or price is specified in the Contract for this item,  and
(iii) no specified rate or price is appropriate because the item of work is
not of similar character, or is not executed under similar conditions, as
any item in the Contract.
Each new rate or price shall be derived from any relevant rates or prices in the
Contract, with reasonable adjustments to take account of the matters described in
sub-paragraph (a) and/or (b), as applicable. If no rates or prices are relevant for the
derivation of a new rate or price, it shall be derived from the reasonable Cost of
executing the work, together with reasonable profit, taking account of any other
relevant matters.
Until such time as an appropriate rate or price is agreed or determined, the Engineer
shall determine a provisional rate or price for the purposes of Interim Payment
Certificates.  
Whenever the omission of any work forms part (or all) of a Variation, the value of which
has not been agreed, if:
(a) the Contractor will incur (or has incurred) cost which, if the work had not been
omitted, would have been deemed to be covered by a sum forming part of the
Accepted Contract Amount;
(b) the omission of the work will result (or has resulted) in this sum not forming part
of the Contract Price;  and
(c) this cost is not deemed to be included in the evaluation of any substituted work;
then the Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer accordingly, with supporting
particulars. Upon receiving this notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with
Sub-Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine this cost, which shall be
included in the Contract Price.  
Variations may be initiated by the Engineer at any time prior to issuing the Taking-Over
Certificate for the Works, either by an instruction or by a request for the Contractor to
submit a proposal.
The Contractor shall execute and be bound by each Variation, unless the Contractor
promptly gives notice to the Engineer stating (with supporting particulars) that the
Contractor cannot readily obtain the Goods required for the Variation. Upon receiving
this notice, the Engineer shall cancel, confirm or vary the instruction.
Each Variation may include:
36 Conditions of Contract for Construction
13Variations and Adjustments
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 53 =====

37General Conditions
13.2
Value Engineering
13.3
Variation Procedure
(a) changes to the quantities of any item of work included in the Contract (however,
such changes do not necessarily constitute a Variation),
(b) changes to the quality and other characteristics of any item of work,
(c) changes to the levels, positions and/or dimensions of any part of the Works,
(d) omission of any work unless it is to be carried out by others,
(e) any additional work, Plant, Materials or services necessary for the Permanent
Works, including any associated Tests on Completion, boreholes and other
testing and exploratory work,  or
(f) changes to the sequence or timing of the execution of the Works.
The Contractor shall not make any alteration and/or modification of the Permanent
Works, unless and until the Engineer instructs or approves a Variation. 
The Contractor may, at any time, submit to the Engineer a written proposal which (in the
Contractor’s opinion) will, if adopted, (i) accelerate completion, (ii) reduce the cost to the
Employer of executing, maintaining or operating the Works,  (iii) improve the efficiency or value
to the Employer of the completed Works, or (iv) otherwise be of benefit to the Employer.
The proposal shall be prepared at the cost of the Contractor and shall include the
items listed in Sub-Clause 13.3 [Variation Procedure].
If a proposal, which is approved by the Engineer, includes a change in the design of
part of the Permanent Works, then unless otherwise agreed by both Parties:
(a) the Contractor shall design this part,
(b) sub-paragraphs (a) to (d) of Sub-Clause 4.1 [ Contractor’s General Obligations]
shall apply,  and
(c) if this change results in a reduction in the contract value of this part, the
Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations] to
agree or determine a fee, which shall be included in the Contract Price. This fee
shall be half (50%) of the difference between the following amounts:
(i) such reduction in contract value, resulting from the change, excluding
adjustments under Sub-Clause 13.7 [ Adjustments for Changes in
Legislation] and Sub-Clause 13.8 [Adjustments for Changes in Cost],and
(ii) the reduction (if any) in the value to the Employer of the varied works,
taking account of any reductions in quality, anticipated life or operational
efficiencies.
However, if amount (i) is less than amount (ii), there shall not be a fee.  
If the Engineer requests a proposal, prior to instructing a Variation, the Contractor shall
respond in writing as soon as practicable, either by giving reasons why he cannot
comply (if this is the case) or by submitting:
(a) a description of the proposed work to be performed and a programme for its
execution,
(b) the Contractor’s proposal for any necessary modifications to the programme
according to Sub-Clause 8.3 [Programme] and to the Time for Completion,  and
(c) the Contractor’s proposal for evaluation of the Variation.
The Engineer shall, as soon as practicable after receiving such proposal (under Sub-
Clause 13.2 [Value Engineering] or otherwise), respond with approval, disapproval or
comments. The Contractor shall not delay any work whilst awaiting a response.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 54 =====

13.4
Payment in Applicable 
Currencies
13.5
Provisional Sums
13.6
Daywork
Each instruction to execute a Variation, with any requirements for the recording of Costs,
shall be issued by the Engineer to the Contractor, who shall acknowledge receipt.
Each Variation shall be evaluated in accordance with Clause 12 [ Measurement and
Evaluation], unless the Engineer instructs or approves otherwise in accordance with
this Clause. 
If the Contract provides for payment of the Contract Price in more than one currency,
then whenever an adjustment is agreed, approved or determined as stated above, the
amount payable in each of the applicable currencies shall be specified. For this
purpose, reference shall be made to the actual or expected currency proportions of
the Cost of the varied work, and to the proportions of various currencies specified for
payment of the Contract Price.  
Each Provisional Sum shall only be used, in whole or in part, in accordance with the
Engineer’s instructions, and the Contract Price shall be adjusted accordingly. The total
sum paid to the Contractor shall include only such amounts, for the work, supplies or
services to which the Provisional Sum relates, as the Engineer shall have instructed.
For each Provisional Sum, the Engineer may instruct:
(a) work to be executed (including Plant, Materials or services to be supplied) by the
Contractor and valued under Sub-Clause 13.3 [Variation Procedure];  and/or
(b) Plant, Materials or services to be purchased by the Contractor, from a
nominated Subcontractor (as defined in Clause 5 [Nominated Subcontractors])
or otherwise; and for which there shall be included in the Contract Price:
(i) the actual amounts paid (or due to be paid) by the Contractor, and
(ii) a sum for overhead charges and profit, calculated as a percentage of
these actual amounts by applying the relevant percentage rate (if any)
stated in the appropriate Schedule. If there is no such rate, the
percentage rate stated in the Appendix to Tender shall be applied.
The Contractor shall, when required by the Engineer, produce quotations, invoices,
vouchers and accounts or receipts in substantiation.  
For work of a minor or incidental nature, the Engineer may instruct that a Variation shall
be executed on a daywork basis. The work shall then be valued in accordance with the
Daywork Schedule included in the Contract, and the following procedure shall apply. If
a Daywork Schedule is not included in the Contract, this Sub-Clause shall not apply.
Before ordering Goods for the work, the Contractor shall submit quotations to the
Engineer. When applying for payment, the Contractor shall submit invoices, vouchers
and accounts or receipts for any Goods.
Except for any items for which the Daywork Schedule specifies that payment is not
due, the Contractor shall deliver each day to the Engineer accurate statements in
duplicate which shall include the following details of the resources used in executing
the previous day’s work:
(a) the names, occupations and time of Contractor’s Personnel,
(b) the identification, type and time of Contractor’s Equipment and Temporary
Works,  and
(c) the quantities and types of Plant and Materials used.
38 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 55 =====

39General Conditions
13.7
Adjustments for
Changes in Legislation
13.8
Adjustments for
Changes in Cost
One copy of each statement will, if correct, or when agreed, be signed by the Engineer
and returned to the Contractor. The Contractor shall then submit priced statements of
these resources to the Engineer, prior to their inclusion in the next Statement under
Sub-Clause 14.3 [Application for Interim Payment Certificates ].  
The Contract Price shall be adjusted to take account of any increase or decrease in
Cost resulting from a change in the Laws of the Country (including the introduction of
new Laws and the repeal or modification of existing Laws) or in the judicial or official
governmental interpretation of such Laws, made after the Base Date, which affect the
Contractor in the performance of obligations under the Contract.  
If the Contractor suffers (or will suffer) delay and/or incurs (or will incur) additional Cost
as a result of these changes in the Laws or in such interpretations, made after the
Base Date, the Contractor shall give notice to the Engineer and shall be entitled
subject to Sub-Clause 20.1 [Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion], and
(b) payment of any such Cost, which shall be included in the Contract Price.
After receiving this notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine these matters.  
In this Sub-Clause, “table of adjustment data” means the completed table of
adjustment data included in the Appendix to Tender. If there is no such table of
adjustment data, this Sub-Clause shall not apply.
If this Sub-Clause applies, the amounts payable to the Contractor shall be adjusted for
rises or falls in the cost of labour, Goods and other inputs to the Works, by the addition
or deduction of the amounts determined by the formulae prescribed in this Sub-Clause.
To the extent that full compensation for any rise or fall in Costs is not covered by the
provisions of this or other Clauses, the Accepted Contract Amount shall be deemed to
have included amounts to cover the contingency of other rises and falls in costs.
The adjustment to be applied to the amount otherwise payable to the Contractor, as
valued in accordance with the appropriate Schedule and certified in Payment Certif-
icates, shall be determined from formulae for each of the currencies in which the
Contract Price is payable. No adjustment is to be applied to work valued on the basis
of Cost or current prices. The formulae shall be of the following general type:
Pn  = a +  b L
n +  c En +  d Mn +  ......
Lo Eo Mo
where:
“Pn” is the adjustment multiplier to be applied to the estimated contract value
in the relevant currency of the work carried out in period “n”, this period being
a month unless otherwise stated in the Appendix to Tender;
“a” is a fixed coefficient, stated in the relevant table of adjustment data,
representing the non-adjustable portion in contractual payments;
“b”, “c”, “d”, … are coefficients representing the estimated proportion of each
cost element related to the execution of the Works, as stated in the relevant
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 56 =====

14.1
The Contract Price
“Ln”, “En”, “Mn”, …  are the current cost indices or reference prices for period
“n”, expressed in the relevant currency of payment, each of which is applicable
to the relevant tabulated cost element on the date 49 days prior to the last day
of the period (to which the particular Payment Certificate relates);  and
“Lo”, “Eo”, “Mo”, … are the base cost indices or reference prices, expressed
in the relevant currency of payment, each of which is applicable to the relevant
tabulated cost element on the Base Date.
The cost indices or reference prices stated in the table of adjustment data shall be
used. If their source is in doubt, it shall be determined by the Engineer. For this
purpose, reference shall be made to the values of the indices at stated dates (quoted
in the fourth and fifth columns respectively of the table) for the purposes of clarification
of the source; although these dates (and thus these values) may not correspond to
the base cost indices.
In cases where the “currency of index” (stated in the table) is not the relevant currency
of payment, each index shall be converted into the relevant currency of payment at
the selling rate, established by the central bank of the Country, of this relevant
currency on the above date for which the index is required to be applicable.
Until such time as each current cost index is available, the Engineer shall determine a
provisional index for the issue of Interim Payment Certificates. When a current cost
index is available, the adjustment shall be recalculated accordingly.
If the Contractor fails to complete the Works within the Time for Completion,
adjustment of prices thereafter shall be made using either  (i) each index or price
applicable on the date 49 days prior to the expiry of the Time for Completion of the
Works, or  (ii) the current index or price: whichever is more favourable to the Employer.
The weightings (coefficients) for each of the factors of cost stated in the table(s) of
adjustment data shall only be adjusted if they have been rendered unreasonable,
unbalanced or inapplicable, as a result of Variations. 
Unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions:
(a) the Contract Price shall be agreed or determined under Sub-Clause 12.3
[Evaluation] and be subject to adjustments in accordance with the Contract;
(b) the Contractor shall pay all taxes, duties and fees required to be paid by him
under the Contract, and the Contract Price shall not be adjusted for any of
these costs except as stated in Sub-Clause 13.7 [ Adjustments for Changes in
Legislation];
(c) any quantities which may be set out in the Bill of Quantities or other Schedule
are estimated quantities and are not to be taken as the actual and correct
quantities:
(i) of the Works which the Contractor is required to execute, or
(ii) for the purposes of Clause 12 [ Measurement and Evaluation];  and
40 Conditions of Contract for Construction
14Contract Price and Payment
table of adjustment data; such tabulated cost elements may be indicative of
resources such as labour, equipment and materials;
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 57 =====

41General Conditions
14.2
Advance Payment
14.3
Application for Interim 
Payment Certificates
(d) the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer, within 28 days after the
Commencement Date, a proposed breakdown of each lump sum price in the
Schedules. The Engineer may take account of the breakdown when preparing
Payment Certificates, but shall not be bound by it.  
The Employer shall make an advance payment, as an interest-free loan for
mobilisation, when the Contractor submits a guarantee in accordance with this Sub-
Clause. The total advance payment, the number and timing of instalments (if more
than one), and the applicable currencies and proportions, shall be as stated in the
Appendix to Tender.
Unless and until the Employer receives this guarantee, or if the total advance payment
is not stated in the Appendix to Tender, this Sub-Clause shall not apply.
The Engineer shall issue an Interim Payment Certificate for the first instalment after
receiving a Statement (under Sub-Clause 14.3 [ Application for Interim Payment
Certificates]) and after the Employer receives (i) the Performance Security in
accordance with Sub-Clause 4.2 [ Performance Security]  and  (ii) a guarantee in
amounts and currencies equal to the advance payment. This guarantee shall be
issued by an entity and from within a country (or other jurisdiction) approved by the
Employer, and shall be in the form annexed to the Particular Conditions or in another
form approved by the Employer.
The Contractor shall ensure that the guarantee is valid and enforceable until the
advance payment has been repaid, but its amount may be progressively reduced by
the amount repaid by the Contractor as indicated in the Payment Certificates. If the
terms of the guarantee specify its expiry date, and the advance payment has not been
repaid by the date 28 days prior to the expiry date, the Contractor shall extend the
validity of the guarantee until the advance payment has been repaid.
The advance payment shall be repaid through percentage deductions in Payment
Certificates. Unless other percentages are stated in the Appendix to Tender:
(a) deductions shall commence in the Payment Certificate in which the total of all
certified interim payments (excluding the advance payment and deductions and
repayments of retention) exceeds ten per cent (10%) of the Accepted Contract
Amount less Provisional Sums;  and
(b) deductions shall be made at the amortisation rate of one quarter (25%) of the
amount of each Payment Certificate (excluding the advance payment and
deductions and repayments of retention) in the currencies and proportions of
the advance payment, until such time as the advance payment has been
repaid.
If the advance payment has not been repaid prior to the issue of the Taking-Over
Certificate for the Works or prior to termination under Clause 15 [ Termination by
Employer], Clause 16 [Suspension and Termination by Contractor] or Clause 19 [Force
Majeure] (as the case may be), the whole of the balance then outstanding shall
immediately become due and payable by the Contractor to the Employer.  
The Contractor shall submit a Statement in six copies to the Engineer after the end of
each month, in a form approved by the Engineer, showing in detail the amounts to
which the Contractor considers himself to be entitled, together with supporting
documents which shall include the report on the progress during this month in
accordance with Sub-Clause 4.21 [Progress Reports].  
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 58 =====

14.4
Schedule of Payments
14.5
Plant and Materials 
intended for the Works
The Statement shall include the following items, as applicable, which shall be expressed
in the various currencies in which the Contract Price is payable, in the sequence listed:
(a) the estimated contract value of the Works executed and the Contractor’s
Documents produced up to the end of the month (including Variations but
excluding items described in sub-paragraphs (b) to (g) below);
(b) any amounts to be added and deducted for changes in legislation and changes
in cost, in accordance with Sub-Clause 13.7 [ Adjustments for Changes in
Legislation] and Sub-Clause 13.8 [Adjustments for Changes in Cost];
(c) any amount to be deducted for retention, calculated by applying the
percentage of retention stated in the Appendix to Tender to the total of the
above amounts, until the amount so retained by the Employer reaches the limit
of Retention Money (if any) stated in the Appendix to Tender;
(d) any amounts to be added and deducted for the advance payment and
repayments in accordance with Sub-Clause 14.2 [Advance Payment];
(e) any amounts to be added and deducted for Plant and Materials in accordance
with Sub-Clause 14.5 [Plant and Materials intended for the Works ];
(f) any other additions or deductions which may have become due under the
Contract or otherwise, including those under Clause 20 [ Claims, Disputes and
Arbitration];  and
(g) the deduction of amounts certified in all previous Payment Certificates.  
If the Contract includes a schedule of payments specifying the instalments in which
the Contract Price will be paid, then unless otherwise stated in this schedule:
(a) the instalments quoted in this schedule of payments shall be the estimated
contract values for the purposes of sub-paragraph (a) of Sub-Clause 14.3
[Application for Interim Payment Certificates];
(b) Sub-Clause 14.5 [ Plant and Materials intended for the Works] shall not apply; and
(c) if these instalments are not defined by reference to the actual progress
achieved in executing the Works, and if actual progress is found to be less than
that on which this schedule of payments was based, then the Engineer may
proceed in accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations] to agree or
determine revised instalments, which shall take account of the extent to which
progress is less than that on which the instalments were previously based.
If the Contract does not include a schedule of payments, the Contractor shall submit
non-binding estimates of the payments which he expects to become due during each
quarterly period. The first estimate shall be submitted within 42 days after the
Commencement Date. Revised estimates shall be submitted at quarterly intervals,
until the Taking-Over Certificate has been issued for the Works. 
If this Sub-Clause applies, Interim Payment Certificates shall include, under sub-
paragraph (e) of Sub-Clause 14.3,  (i) an amount for Plant and Materials which have
been sent to the Site for incorporation in the Permanent Works, and  (ii) a reduction
when the contract value of such Plant and Materials is included as part of the
Permanent Works under sub-paragraph (a) of Sub-Clause 14.3 [Application for Interim
Payment Certificates]. 
If the lists referred to in sub-paragraphs (b)(i) or (c)(i) below are not included in the
Appendix to Tender, this Sub-Clause shall not apply.
The Engineer shall determine and certify each addition if the following conditions are
satisfied:
42 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 59 =====

43General Conditions
14.6
Issue of Interim Payment 
Certificates
(a) the Contractor has:
(i) kept satisfactory records (including the orders, receipts, Costs and use
of Plant and Materials) which are available for inspection,  and
(ii) submitted a statement of the Cost of acquiring and delivering the Plant
and Materials to the Site, supported by satisfactory evidence;
and either:
(b) the relevant Plant and Materials:
(i) are those listed in the Appendix to Tender for payment when shipped,
(ii) have been shipped to the Country, en route to the Site, in accordance
with the Contract; and
(iii) are described in a clean shipped bill of lading or other evidence of
shipment, which has been submitted to the Engineer together with
evidence of payment of freight and insurance, any other documents
reasonably required, and a bank guarantee in a form and issued by an
entity approved by the Employer in amounts and currencies equal to the
amount due under this Sub-Clause: this guarantee may be in a similar
form to the form referred to in Sub-Clause 14.2 [Advance Payment] and
shall be valid until the Plant and Materials are properly stored on Site and
protected against loss, damage or deterioration;
or
(c) the relevant Plant and Materials:
(i) are those listed in the Appendix to Tender for payment when delivered to
the Site,  and
(ii) have been delivered to and are properly stored on the Site, are protected
against loss, damage or deterioration, and appear to be in accordance
with the Contract.
The additional amount to be certified shall be the equivalent of eighty percent of the
Engineer’s determination of the cost of the Plant and Materials (including delivery to
Site), taking account of the documents mentioned in this Sub-Clause and of the
contract value of the Plant and Materials.
The currencies for this additional amount shall be the same as those in which payment
will become due when the contract value is included under sub-paragraph (a) of Sub-
Clause 14.3 [Application for Interim Payment Certificates ]. At that time, the Payment
Certificate shall include the applicable reduction which shall be equivalent to, and in
the same currencies and proportions as, this additional amount for the relevant Plant
and Materials.  
No amount will be certified or paid until the Employer has received and approved the
Performance Security. Thereafter, the Engineer shall, within 28 days after receiving a
Statement and supporting documents, issue to the Employer an Interim Payment
Certificate which shall state the amount which the Engineer fairly determines to be
due, with supporting particulars.  
However, prior to issuing the Taking-Over Certificate for the Works, the Engineer shall
not be bound to issue an Interim Payment Certificate in an amount which would (after
retention and other deductions) be less than the minimum amount of Interim Payment
Certificates (if any) stated in the Appendix to Tender. In this event, the Engineer shall
give notice to the Contractor accordingly.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 60 =====

14.7
Payment
14.8
Delayed Payment
14.9
Payment of Retention 
Money
An Interim Payment Certificate shall not be withheld for any other reason, although:
(a) if any thing supplied or work done by the Contractor is not in accordance with
the Contract, the cost of rectification or replacement may be withheld until
rectification or replacement has been completed;  and/or
(b) if the Contractor was or is failing to perform any work or obligation in
accordance with the Contract, and had been so notified by the Engineer, the
value of this work or obligation may be withheld until the work or obligation has
been performed.
The Engineer may in any Payment Certificate make any correction or modification that
should properly be made to any previous Payment Certificate. A Payment Certificate shall
not be deemed to indicate the Engineer’s acceptance, approval, consent or satisfaction.  
The Employer shall pay to the Contractor:
(a) the first instalment of the advance payment within 42 days after issuing the
Letter of Acceptance or within 21 days after receiving the documents in
accordance with Sub-Clause 4.2 [Performance Security] and Sub-Clause 14.2
[Advance Payment], whichever is later;
(b) the amount certified in each Interim Payment Certificate within 56 days after the
Engineer receives the Statement and supporting documents;  and
(c) the amount certified in the Final Payment Certificate within 56 days after the
Employer receives this Payment Certificate.
Payment of the amount due in each currency shall be made into the bank account,
nominated by the Contractor, in the payment country (for this currency) specified in
the Contract.
If the Contractor does not receive payment in accordance with Sub-Clause 14.7
[Payment], the Contractor shall be entitled to receive financing charges compounded
monthly on the amount unpaid during the period of delay. This period shall be deemed
to commence on the date for payment specified in Sub-Clause 14.7 [ Payment],
irrespective (in the case of its sub-paragraph (b)) of the date on which any Interim
Payment Certificate is issued.
Unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions, these financing charges shall be
calculated at the annual rate of three percentage points above the discount rate of the
central bank in the country of the currency of payment, and shall be paid in such currency.
The Contractor shall be entitled to this payment without formal notice or certification,
and without prejudice to any other right or remedy.  
When the Taking-Over Certificate has been issued for the Works, the first half of the
Retention Money shall be certified by the Engineer for payment to the Contractor. If a
Taking-Over Certificate is issued for a Section or part of the Works, a proportion of the
Retention Money shall be certified and paid. This proportion shall be two-fifths (40%)
of the proportion calculated by dividing the estimated contract value of the Section or
part, by the estimated final Contract Price.
Promptly after the latest of the expiry dates of the Defects Notification Periods, the
outstanding balance of the Retention Money shall be certified by the Engineer for
payment to the Contractor. If a Taking-Over Certificate was issued for a Section, a
44 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 61 =====

45General Conditions
14.10
Statement at Completion
14.11
Application for Final 
Payment Certificate
14.12
Discharge
proportion of the second half of the Retention Money shall be certified and paid
promptly after the expiry date of the Defects Notification Period for the Section. This
proportion shall be two-fifths (40%) of the proportion calculated by dividing the
estimated contract value of the Section by the estimated final Contract Price.
However, if any work remains to be executed under Clause 11 [ Defects Liability], the
Engineer shall be entitled to withhold certification of the estimated cost of this work
until it has been executed.
When calculating these proportions, no account shall be taken of any adjustments
under Sub-Clause 13.7 [Adjustments for Changes in Legislation] and Sub-
Clause 13.8 [Adjustments for Changes in Cost ].  
Within 84 days after receiving the Taking-Over Certificate for the Works, the
Contractor shall submit to the Engineer six copies of a Statement at completion with
supporting documents, in accordance with Sub-Clause 14.3 [ Application for Interim
Payment Certificates], showing:
(a) the value of all work done in accordance with the Contract up to the date stated
in the Taking-Over Certificate for the Works,
(b) any further sums which the Contractor considers to be due, and
(c) an estimate of any other amounts which the Contractor considers will become
due to him under the Contract. Estimated amounts shall be shown separately
in this Statement at completion.
The Engineer shall then certify in accordance with Sub-Clause 14.6 [ Issue of Interim
Payment Certificates].  
Within 56 days after receiving the Performance Certificate, the Contractor shall
submit, to the Engineer, six copies of a draft final statement with supporting
documents showing in detail in a form approved by the Engineer:
(a) the value of all work done in accordance with the Contract, and 
(b) any further sums which the Contractor considers to be due to him under the
Contract or otherwise.
If the Engineer disagrees with or cannot verify any part of the draft final statement, the
Contractor shall submit such further information as the Engineer may reasonably
require and shall make such changes in the draft as may be agreed between them. The
Contractor shall then prepare and submit to the Engineer the final statement as agreed.
This agreed statement is referred to in these Conditions as the “Final Statement”.
However if, following discussions between the Engineer and the Contractor and any
changes to the draft final statement which are agreed, it becomes evident that a
dispute exists, the Engineer shall deliver to the Employer (with a copy to the
Contractor) an Interim Payment Certificate for the agreed parts of the draft final
statement.  Thereafter, if the dispute is finally resolved under Sub-Clause 20.4
[Obtaining Dispute Adjudication Board’s Decision ] or Sub-Clause 20.5 [ Amicable
Settlement], the Contractor shall then prepare and submit to the Employer (with a
copy to the Engineer) a Final Statement.  
When submitting the Final Statement, the Contractor shall submit a written discharge
which confirms that the total of the Final Statement represents full and final settlement
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 62 =====

14.13
Issue of Final Payment 
Certificate
14.14
Cessation of Employer’s 
Liability
14.15
Currencies of Payment
of all moneys due to the Contractor under or in connection with the Contract. This
discharge may state that it becomes effective when the Contractor has received the
Performance Security and the outstanding balance of this total, in which event the
discharge shall be effective on such date.  
Within 28 days after receiving the Final Statement and written discharge in
accordance with Sub-Clause 14.11 [Application for Final Payment Certificate ] and
Sub-Clause 14.12 [ Discharge], the Engineer shall issue, to the Employer, the Final
Payment Certificate which shall state:
(a) the amount which is finally due, and
(b) after giving credit to the Employer for all amounts previously paid by the
Employer and for all sums to which the Employer is entitled, the balance (if any)
due from the Employer to the Contractor or from the Contractor to the
Employer, as the case may be.
If the Contractor has not applied for a Final Payment Certificate in accordance with
Sub-Clause 14.11 [Application for Final Payment Certificate ] and Sub-Clause 14.12
[Discharge], the Engineer shall request the Contractor to do so. If the Contractor fails
to submit an application within a period of 28 days, the Engineer shall issue the Final
Payment Certificate for such amount as he fairly determines to be due.  
The Employer shall not be liable to the Contractor for any matter or thing under or in
connection with the Contract or execution of the Works, except to the extent that the
Contractor shall have included an amount expressly for it:
(a) in the Final Statement and also
(b) (except for matters or things arising after the issue of the Taking-Over Certificate
for the Works) in the Statement at completion described in Sub-Clause 14.10
[Statement at Completion].
However, this Sub-Clause shall not limit the Employer’s liability under his indemn-
ification obligations, or the Employer’s liability in any case of fraud, deliberate default
or reckless misconduct by the Employer.  
The Contract Price shall be paid in the currency or currencies named in the Appendix
to Tender. Unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions, if more than one
currency is so named, payments shall be made as follows:
(a) if the Accepted Contract Amount was expressed in Local Currency only:
(i) the proportions or amounts of the Local and Foreign Currencies, and the fixed
rates of exchange to be used for calculating the payments, shall be as stated
in the Appendix to Tender, except as otherwise agreed by both Parties;
(ii) payments and deductions under Sub-Clause 13.5 [ Provisional Sums ]
and Sub-Clause 13.7 [ Adjustments for Changes in Legislation ] shall be
made in the applicable currencies and proportions;  and
(iii) other payments and deductions under sub-paragraphs (a) to (d) of Sub-
Clause 14.3 [Application for Interim Payment Certificates] shall be made
in the currencies and proportions specified in sub-paragraph (a)(i) above;
(b) payment of the damages specified in the Appendix to Tender shall be made in
the currencies and proportions specified in the Appendix to Tender;
46 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 63 =====

47General Conditions
15.1
Notice to Correct
15.2
Termination by Employer
(c) other payments to the Employer by the Contractor shall be made in the
currency in which the sum was expended by the Employer, or in such currency
as may be agreed by both Parties;
(d) if any amount payable by the Contractor to the Employer in a particular
currency exceeds the sum payable by the Employer to the Contractor in that
currency, the Employer may recover the balance of this amount from the sums
otherwise payable to the Contractor in other currencies;  and
(e) if no rates of exchange are stated in the Appendix to Tender, they shall be those
prevailing on the Base Date and determined by the central bank of the Country.
If the Contractor fails to carry out any obligation under the Contract, the Engineer may
by notice require the Contractor to make good the failure and to remedy it within a
specified reasonable time. 
The Employer shall be entitled to terminate the Contract if the Contractor:
(a) fails to comply with Sub-Clause 4.2 [ Performance Security] or with a notice
under Sub-Clause 15.1 [Notice to Correct],  
(b) abandons the Works or otherwise plainly demonstrates the intention not to
continue performance of his obligations under the Contract,
(c) without reasonable excuse fails:
(i) to proceed with the Works in accordance with Clause 8
[Commencement, Delays and Suspension],  or
(ii) to comply with a notice issued under Sub-Clause 7.5 [Rejection] or Sub-
Clause 7.6 [Remedial Work], within 28 days after receiving it,
(d) subcontracts the whole of the Works or assigns the Contract without the
required agreement,
(e) becomes bankrupt or insolvent, goes into liquidation, has a receiving or
administration order made against him, compounds with his creditors, or
carries on business under a receiver, trustee or manager for the benefit of his
creditors, or if any act is done or event occurs which (under applicable Laws)
has a similar effect to any of these acts or events,  or
(f) gives or offers to give (directly or indirectly) to any person any bribe, gift, gratuity,
commission or other thing of value, as an inducement or reward:
(i) for doing or forbearing to do any action in relation to the Contract,  or
(ii) for showing or forbearing to show favour or disfavour to any person in
relation to the Contract,
or if any of the Contractor’s Personnel, agents or Subcontractors gives or offers
to give (directly or indirectly) to any person any such inducement or reward as
is described in this sub-paragraph (f). However, lawful inducements and
rewards to Contractor’s Personnel shall not entitle termination.
In any of these events or circumstances, the Employer may, upon giving 14 days’
notice to the Contractor, terminate the Contract and expel the Contractor from the
Site. However, in the case of sub-paragraph (e) or (f), the Employer may by notice
terminate the Contract immediately.
15Termination by Employer
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 64 =====

15.3
Valuation at Date of 
Termination
15.4
Payment after 
Termination
15.5
Employer’s Entitlement
to Termination
The Employer’s election to terminate the Contract shall not prejudice any other rights
of the Employer, under the Contract or otherwise.
The Contractor shall then leave the Site and deliver any required Goods, all
Contractor’s Documents, and other design documents made by or for him, to the
Engineer. However, the Contractor shall use his best efforts to comply immediately
with any reasonable instructions included in the notice  (i) for the assignment of any
subcontract, and  (ii) for the protection of life or property or for the safety of the
Works.
After termination, the Employer may complete the Works and/or arrange for any other
entities to do so. The Employer and these entities may then use any Goods,
Contractor’s Documents and other design documents made by or on behalf of the
Contractor.
The Employer shall then give notice that the Contractor’s Equipment and Temporary
Works will be released to the Contractor at or near the Site. The Contractor shall
promptly arrange their removal, at the risk and cost of the Contractor. However, if by
this time the Contractor has failed to make a payment due to the Employer, these
items may be sold by the Employer in order to recover this payment. Any balance of
the proceeds shall then be paid to the Contractor.  
As soon as practicable after a notice of termination under Sub-Clause 15.2
[Termination by Employer] has taken effect, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance
with Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations] to agree or determine the value of the Works,
Goods and Contractor’s Documents, and any other sums due to the Contractor for
work executed in accordance with the Contract.  
After a notice of termination under Sub-Clause 15.2 [ Termination by Employer] has
taken effect, the Employer may:
(a) proceed in accordance with Sub-Clause 2.5 [ Employer’s Claims],
(b) withhold further payments to the Contractor until the costs of execution,
completion and remedying of any defects, damages for delay in completion (if
any), and all other costs incurred by the Employer, have been established,
and/or
(c) recover from the Contractor any losses and damages incurred by the Employer
and any extra costs of completing the Works, after allowing for any sum due to
the Contractor under Sub-Clause 15.3 [Valuation at Date of Termination]. After
recovering any such losses, damages and extra costs, the Employer shall pay
any balance to the Contractor.  
The Employer shall be entitled to terminate the Contract, at any time for the Employer’s
convenience, by giving notice of such termination to the Contractor. The termination
shall take effect 28 days after the later of the dates on which the Contractor receives this
notice or the Employer returns the Performance Security. The Employer shall not
terminate the Contract under this Sub-Clause in order to execute the Works himself or
to arrange for the Works to be executed by another contractor.
After this termination, the Contractor shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 16.3 [Cessation of Work and Removal of Contractor’s Equipment] and shall be
paid in accordance with Sub-Clause 19.6 [ Optional Termination, Payment and
Release].
48 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 65 =====

49General Conditions
16.1
Contractor’s Entitlement 
to Suspend Work
16.2
Termination by 
Contractor
If the Engineer fails to certify in accordance with Sub-Clause 14.6 [ Issue of Interim
Payment Certificates ] or the Employer fails to comply with Sub-Clause 2.4
[Employer’s Financial Arrangements ] or Sub-Clause 14.7 [ Payment], the Contractor
may, after giving not less than 21 days’ notice to the Employer, suspend work (or
reduce the rate of work) unless and until the Contractor has received the Payment
Certificate, reasonable evidence or payment, as the case may be and as described
in the notice.
The Contractor’s action shall not prejudice his entitlements to financing charges under
Sub-Clause 14.8 [ Delayed Payment] and to termination under Sub-Clause 16.2
[Termination by Contractor].
If the Contractor subsequently receives such Payment Certificate, evidence or
payment (as described in the relevant Sub-Clause and in the above notice) before
giving a notice of termination, the Contractor shall resume normal working as soon as
is reasonably practicable.
If the Contractor suffers delay and/or incurs Cost as a result of suspending work (or
reducing the rate of work) in accordance with this Sub-Clause, the Contractor shall
give notice to the Engineer and shall be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 20.1
[Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion], and
(b) payment of any such Cost plus reasonable profit, which shall be included in the
Contract Price.
After receiving this notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine these matters. 
The Contractor shall be entitled to terminate the Contract if:
(a) the Contractor does not receive the reasonable evidence within 42 days after
giving notice under Sub-Clause 16.1 [ Contractor’s Entitlement to Suspend
Work] in respect of a failure to comply with Sub-Clause 2.4 [ Employer’s
Financial Arrangements],
(b) the Engineer fails, within 56 days after receiving a Statement and supporting
documents, to issue the relevant Payment Certificate,
(c) the Contractor does not receive the amount due under an Interim Payment
Certificate within 42 days after the expiry of the time stated in Sub-Clause 14.7
[Payment] within which payment is to be made (except for deductions in
accordance with Sub-Clause 2.5 [Employer’s Claims]),
(d) the Employer substantially fails to perform his obligations under the Contract,
(e) the Employer fails to comply with Sub-Clause 1.6 [ Contract Agreement] or
Sub-Clause 1.7 [Assignment],
(f) a prolonged suspension affects the whole of the Works as described in Sub-
Clause 8.11 [Prolonged Suspension],  or
(g) the Employer becomes bankrupt or insolvent, goes into liquidation, has a
receiving or administration order made against him, compounds with his
creditors, or carries on business under a receiver, trustee or manager for the
16Suspension and Termination by Contractor
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 66 =====

16.3
Cessation of Work and 
Removal of Contractor’s 
Equipment
16.4
Payment on Termination
17.1
Indemnities
benefit of his creditors, or if any act is done or event occurs which (under
applicable Laws) has a similar effect to any of these acts or events.
In any of these events or circumstances, the Contractor may, upon giving 14 days’
notice to the Employer, terminate the Contract. However, in the case of sub-
paragraph (f) or (g), the Contractor may by notice terminate the Contract immediately.
The Contractor’s election to terminate the Contract shall not prejudice any other rights
of the Contractor, under the Contract or otherwise.  
After a notice of termination under Sub-Clause 15.5 [ Employer’s Entitlement to
Termination], Sub-Clause 16.2 [ Termination by Contractor ] or Sub-Clause 19.6
[Optional Termination, Payment and Release] has taken effect, the Contractor shall
promptly:
(a) cease all further work, except for such work as may have been instructed by
the Engineer for the protection of life or property or for the safety of the Works,
(b) hand over Contractor’s Documents, Plant, Materials and other work, for which
the Contractor has received payment,  and
(c) remove all other Goods from the Site, except as necessary for safety, and leave
the Site.  
After a notice of termination under Sub-Clause 16.2 [ Termination by Contractor] has
taken effect, the Employer shall promptly:
(a) return the Performance Security to the Contractor,
(b) pay the Contractor in accordance with Sub-Clause 19.6 [ Optional Termination,
Payment and Release],  and
(c) pay to the Contractor the amount of any loss of profit or other loss or damage
sustained by the Contractor as a result of this termination.  
The Contractor shall indemnify and hold harmless the Employer, the Employer’s
Personnel, and their respective agents, against and from all claims, damages, losses
and expenses (including legal fees and expenses) in respect of: 
(a) bodily injury, sickness, disease or death, of any person whatsoever arising out
of or in the course of or by reason of the Contractor’s design (if any), the
execution and completion of the Works and the remedying of any defects,
unless attributable to any negligence, wilful act or breach of the Contract by the
Employer, the Employer’s Personnel, or any of their respective agents,  and
(b) damage to or loss of any property, real or personal (other than the Works), to
the extent that such damage or loss:
(i) arises out of or in the course of or by reason of the Contractor’s design
(if any), the execution and completion of the Works and the remedying of
any defects, and
(ii) is attributable to any negligence, wilful act or breach of the Contract by
the Contractor, the Contractor’s Personnel, their respective agents, or
anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them.
50 Conditions of Contract for Construction
17Risk and Responsibility
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 67 =====

51General Conditions
17.2
Contractor’s Care
of the Works
17.3
Employer’s Risks
The Employer shall indemnify and hold harmless the Contractor, the Contractor’s
Personnel, and their respective agents, against and from all claims, damages, losses
and expenses (including legal fees and expenses) in respect of  (1) bodily injury,
sickness, disease or death, which is attributable to any negligence, wilful act or breach
of the Contract by the Employer, the Employer’s Personnel, or any of their respective
agents,  and  (2) the matters for which liability may be excluded from insurance cover,
as described in sub-paragraphs (d)(i), (ii) and (iii) of Sub-Clause 18.3 [ Insurance
Against Injury to Persons and Damage to Property ].  
The Contractor shall take full responsibility for the care of the Works and Goods from
the Commencement Date until the Taking-Over Certificate is issued (or is deemed to
be issued under Sub-Clause 10.1 [ Taking Over of the Works and Sections ]) for the
Works, when responsibility for the care of the Works shall pass to the Employer. If a
Taking-Over Certificate is issued (or is so deemed to be issued) for any Section or part
of the Works, responsibility for the care of the Section or part shall then pass to the
Employer.
After responsibility has accordingly passed to the Employer, the Contractor shall take
responsibility for the care of any work which is outstanding on the date stated in a
Taking-Over Certificate, until this outstanding work has been completed.
If any loss or damage happens to the Works, Goods or Contractor’s Documents
during the period when the Contractor is responsible for their care, from any cause
not listed in Sub-Clause 17.3 [ Employer’s Risks], the Contractor shall rectify the loss
or damage at the Contractor’s risk and cost, so that the Works, Goods and
Contractor’s Documents conform with the Contract.
The Contractor shall be liable for any loss or damage caused by any actions
performed by the Contractor after a Taking-Over Certificate has been issued. The
Contractor shall also be liable for any loss or damage which occurs after a Taking-
Over Certificate has been issued and which arose from a previous event for which the
Contractor was liable.  
The risks referred to in Sub-Clause 17.4 below are:
(a) war, hostilities (whether war be declared or not), invasion, act of foreign
enemies,
(b) rebellion, terrorism, revolution, insurrection, military or usurped power, or civil
war, within the Country,
(c) riot, commotion or disorder within the Country by persons other than the
Contractor’s Personnel and other employees of the Contractor and
Subcontractors,
(d) munitions of war, explosive materials, ionising radiation or contamination by
radio-activity, within the Country, except as may be attributable to the
Contractor’s use of such munitions, explosives, radiation or radio-activity,
(e) pressure waves caused by aircraft or other aerial devices travelling at sonic or
supersonic speeds,
(f) use or occupation by the Employer of any part of the Permanent Works, except
as may be specified in the Contract,
(g) design of any part of the Works by the Employer’s Personnel or by others for
whom the Employer is responsible,  and
(h) any operation of the forces of nature which is Unforeseeable or against which
an experienced contractor could not reasonably have been expected to have
taken adequate preventative precautions.  
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 68 =====

17.4
Consequences of 
Employer’s Risks
17.5
Intellectual and Industrial 
Property Rights
17.6
Limitation of Liability
If and to the extent that any of the risks listed in Sub-Clause 17.3 above results in loss
or damage to the Works, Goods or Contractor’s Documents, the Contractor shall
promptly give notice to the Engineer and shall rectify this loss or damage to the extent
required by the Engineer.
If the Contractor suffers delay and/or incurs Cost from rectifying this loss or damage,
the Contractor shall give a further notice to the Engineer and shall be entitled subject
to Sub-Clause 20.1 [Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion], and
(b) payment of any such Cost, which shall be included in the Contract Price. In the
case of sub-paragraphs (f) and (g) of Sub-Clause 17.3 [ Employer’s Risks ],
reasonable profit on the Cost shall also be included.
After receiving this further notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine these matters.  
In this Sub-Clause, “infringement” means an infringement (or alleged infringement) of
any patent, registered design, copyright, trade mark, trade name, trade secret or other
intellectual or industrial property right relating to the Works; and “claim” means a claim
(or proceedings pursuing a claim) alleging an infringement.
Whenever a Party does not give notice to the other Party of any claim within 28 days
of receiving the claim, the first Party shall be deemed to have waived any right to
indemnity under this Sub-Clause.
The Employer shall indemnify and hold the Contractor harmless against and from any
claim alleging an infringement which is or was:
(a) an unavoidable result of the Contractor’s compliance with the Contract,  or
(b) a result of any Works being used by the Employer:
(i) for a purpose other than that indicated by, or reasonably to be inferred
from, the Contract, or
(ii) in conjunction with any thing not supplied by the Contractor, unless such
use was disclosed to the Contractor prior to the Base Date or is stated
in the Contract.
The Contractor shall indemnify and hold the Employer harmless against and from any
other claim which arises out of or in relation to  (i) the manufacture, use, sale or import
of any Goods, or  (ii) any design for which the Contractor is responsible.
If a Party is entitled to be indemnified under this Sub-Clause, the indemnifying Party
may (at its cost) conduct negotiations for the settlement of the claim, and any litigation
or arbitration which may arise from it. The other Party shall, at the request and cost of
the indemnifying Party, assist in contesting the claim. This other Party (and its
Personnel) shall not make any admission which might be prejudicial to the indemnifying
Party, unless the indemnifying Party failed to take over the conduct of any negotiations,
litigation or arbitration upon being requested to do so by such other Party.  
Neither Party shall be liable to the other Party for loss of use of any Works, loss of
profit, loss of any contract or for any indirect or consequential loss or damage which
may be suffered by the other Party in connection with the Contract, other than under
52 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 69 =====

53General Conditions
18.1
General Requirements
for Insurances
Sub-Clause 16.4 [Payment on Termination] and Sub-Clause 17.1 [Indemnities].
The total liability of the Contractor to the Employer, under or in connection with the
Contract other than under Sub-Clause 4.19 [ Electricity, Water and Gas ], Sub-
Clause 4.20 [ Employer’s Equipment and Free-Issue Material], Sub-Clause 17.1
[Indemnities] and Sub-Clause 17.5 [Intellectual and Industrial Property Rights ], shall
not exceed the sum stated in the Particular Conditions or (if a sum is not so stated)
the Accepted Contract Amount.
This Sub-Clause shall not limit liability in any case of fraud, deliberate default or
reckless misconduct by the defaulting Party.  
In this Clause, “insuring Party” means, for each type of insurance, the Party responsible
for effecting and maintaining the insurance specified in the relevant Sub-Clause.  
Wherever the Contractor is the insuring Party, each insurance shall be effected with
insurers and in terms approved by the Employer. These terms shall be consistent with
any terms agreed by both Parties before the date of the Letter of Acceptance. This
agreement of terms shall take precedence over the provisions of this Clause.
Wherever the Employer is the insuring Party, each insurance shall be effected with
insurers and in terms consistent with the details annexed to the Particular Conditions.
If a policy is required to indemnify joint insured, the cover shall apply separately to
each insured as though a separate policy had been issued for each of the joint
insured. If a policy indemnifies additional joint insured, namely in addition to the
insured specified in this Clause,  (i) the Contractor shall act under the policy on behalf
of these additional joint insured except that the Employer shall act for Employer’s
Personnel,  (ii) additional joint insured shall not be entitled to receive payments directly
from the insurer or to have any other direct dealings with the insurer,  and  (iii) the
insuring Party shall require all additional joint insured to comply with the conditions
stipulated in the policy.
Each policy insuring against loss or damage shall provide for payments to be made in
the currencies required to rectify the loss or damage. Payments received from insurers
shall be used for the rectification of the loss or damage.
The relevant insuring Party shall, within the respective periods stated in the Appendix
to Tender (calculated from the Commencement Date), submit to the other Party:
(a) evidence that the insurances described in this Clause have been effected,  and
(b) copies of the policies for the insurances described in Sub-Clause 18.2
[Insurance for Works and Contractor’s Equipment ] and Sub-Clause 18.3
[Insurance against Injury to Persons and Damage to Property ].
When each premium is paid, the insuring Party shall submit evidence of payment to
the other Party. Whenever evidence or policies are submitted, the insuring Party shall
also give notice to the Engineer.
Each Party shall comply with the conditions stipulated in each of the insurance
policies. The insuring Party shall keep the insurers informed of any relevant changes
18Insurance
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 70 =====

18.2
Insurance for Works and 
Contractor’s Equipment
to the execution of the Works and ensure that insurance is maintained in accordance
with this Clause.
Neither Party shall make any material alteration to the terms of any insurance without
the prior approval of the other Party. If an insurer makes (or attempts to make) any
alteration, the Party first notified by the insurer shall promptly give notice to the other
Party.
If the insuring Party fails to effect and keep in force any of the insurances it is required
to effect and maintain under the Contract, or fails to provide satisfactory evidence and
copies of policies in accordance with this Sub-Clause, the other Party may (at its
option and without prejudice to any other right or remedy) effect insurance for the
relevant coverage and pay the premiums due. The insuring Party shall pay the amount
of these premiums to the other Party, and the Contract Price shall be adjusted
accordingly.
Nothing in this Clause limits the obligations, liabilities or responsibilities of the
Contractor or the Employer, under the other terms of the Contract or otherwise. Any
amounts not insured or not recovered from the insurers shall be borne by the
Contractor and/or the Employer in accordance with these obligations, liabilities or
responsibilities. However, if the insuring Party fails to effect and keep in force an
insurance which is available and which it is required to effect and maintain under the
Contract, and the other Party neither approves the omission nor effects insurance for
the coverage relevant to this default, any moneys which should have been recoverable
under this insurance shall be paid by the insuring Party. 
Payments by one Party to the other Party shall be subject to Sub-Clause 2.5
[Employer’s Claims] or Sub-Clause 20.1 [Contractor’s Claims], as applicable.  
The insuring Party shall insure the Works, Plant, Materials and Contractor’s
Documents for not less than the full reinstatement cost including the costs of
demolition, removal of debris and professional fees and profit. This insurance shall be
effective from the date by which the evidence is to be submitted under sub-paragraph
(a) of Sub-Clause 18.1 [ General Requirements for Insurances], until the date of issue
of the Taking-Over Certificate for the Works.  
The insuring Party shall maintain this insurance to provide cover until the date of issue
of the Performance Certificate, for loss or damage for which the Contractor is liable
arising from a cause occurring prior to the issue of the Taking-Over Certificate, and for
loss or damage caused by the Contractor in the course of any other operations
(including those under Clause 11 [Defects Liability ]).
The insuring Party shall insure the Contractor’s Equipment for not less than the full
replacement value, including delivery to Site. For each item of Contractor’s Equipment,
the insurance shall be effective while it is being transported to the Site and until it is
no longer required as Contractor’s Equipment.
Unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions, insurances under this Sub-Clause:
(a) shall be effected and maintained by the Contractor as insuring Party,
(b) shall be in the joint names of the Parties, who shall be jointly entitled to receive
payments from the insurers, payments being held or allocated between the
Parties for the sole purpose of rectifying the loss or damage,
(c) shall cover all loss and damage from any cause not listed in Sub-Clause 17.3
[Employer’s Risks],
54 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 71 =====

55General Conditions
18.3
Insurance against Injury 
to Persons and Damage
to Property
(d) shall also cover loss or damage to a part of the Works which is attributable to
the use or occupation by the Employer of another part of the Works, and loss
or damage from the risks listed in sub-paragraphs (c), (g) and (h) of Sub-
Clause 17.3 [ Employer’s Risks], excluding (in each case) risks which are not
insurable at commercially reasonable terms, with deductibles per occurrence of
not more than the amount stated in the Appendix to Tender (if an amount is not
so stated, this sub-paragraph (d) shall not apply),  and
(e) may however exclude loss of, damage to, and reinstatement of:
(i) a part of the Works which is in a defective condition due to a defect in
its design, materials or workmanship (but cover shall include any other
parts which are lost or damaged as a direct result of this defective
condition and not as described in sub-paragraph (ii) below),
(ii) a part of the Works which is lost or damaged in order to reinstate any
other part of the Works if this other part is in a defective condition due to
a defect in its design, materials or workmanship,
(iii) a part of the Works which has been taken over by the Employer, except
to the extent that the Contractor is liable for the loss or damage,  and
(iv) Goods while they are not in the Country, subject to Sub-Clause 14.5
[Plant and Materials intended for the Works ].
If, more than one year after the Base Date, the cover described in sub-paragraph (d)
above ceases to be available at commercially reasonable terms, the Contractor shall
(as insuring Party) give notice to the Employer, with supporting particulars. The
Employer shall then  (i) be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 2.5 [ Employer’s Claims] to
payment of an amount equivalent to such commercially reasonable terms as the
Contractor should have expected to have paid for such cover,  and  (ii) be deemed,
unless he obtains the cover at commercially reasonable terms, to have approved the
omission under Sub-Clause 18.1 [General Requirements for Insurances ].  
The insuring Party shall insure against each Party’s liability for any loss, damage, death
or bodily injury which may occur to any physical property (except things insured under
Sub-Clause 18.2 [Insurance for Works and Contractor’s Equipment]) or to any person
(except persons insured under Sub-Clause 18.4 [ Insurance for Contractor’s
Personnel]), which may arise out of the Contractor’s performance of the Contract and
occurring before the issue of the Performance Certificate.  
This insurance shall be for a limit per occurrence of not less than the amount stated in
the Appendix to Tender, with no limit on the number of occurrences. If an amount is not
stated in the Appendix to Tender, this Sub-Clause shall not apply.
Unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions, the insurances specified in this
Sub-Clause:
(a) shall be effected and maintained by the Contractor as insuring Party,
(b) shall be in the joint names of the Parties,
(c) shall be extended to cover liability for all loss and damage to the Employer’s
property (except things insured under Sub-Clause 18.2) arising out of the
Contractor’s performance of the Contract,  and
(d) may however exclude liability to the extent that it arises from:
(i) the Employer’s right to have the Permanent Works executed on, over, under,
in or through any land, and to occupy this land for the Permanent Works,
(ii) damage which is an unavoidable result of the Contractor’s obligations to
execute the Works and remedy any defects,  and
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 72 =====

18.4
Insurance for
Contractor’s Personnel
19.1
Definition of Force 
Majeure
19.2
Notice of Force Majeure
(iii) a cause listed in Sub-Clause 17.3 [Employer’s Risks ], except to the
extent that cover is available at commercially reasonable terms.  
The Contractor shall effect and maintain insurance against liability for claims,
damages, losses and expenses (including legal fees and expenses) arising from injury,
sickness, disease or death of any person employed by the Contractor or any other of
the Contractor’s Personnel.
The Employer and the Engineer shall also be indemnified under the policy of
insurance, except that this insurance may exclude losses and claims to the extent
that they arise from any act or neglect of the Employer or of the Employer’s
Personnel.
The insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect during the whole time that
these personnel are assisting in the execution of the Works. For a Subcontractor’s
employees, the insurance may be effected by the Subcontractor, but the Contractor
shall be responsible for compliance with this Clause.  
In this Clause, “Force Majeure” means an exceptional event or circumstance:
(a) which is beyond a Party’s control,  
(b) which such Party could not reasonably have provided against before entering
into the Contract,
(c) which, having arisen, such Party could not reasonably have avoided or
overcome,  and
(d) which is not substantially attributable to the other Party.
Force Majeure may include, but is not limited to, exceptional events or circumstances
of the kind listed below, so long as conditions (a) to (d) above are satisfied:
(i) war, hostilities (whether war be declared or not), invasion, act of foreign
enemies,
(ii) rebellion, terrorism, revolution, insurrection, military or usurped power, or
civil war,
(iii) riot, commotion, disorder, strike or lockout by persons other than the
Contractor’s Personnel and other employees of the Contractor and Sub-
contractors,
(iv) munitions of war, explosive materials, ionising radiation or contamination
by radio-activity, except as may be attributable to the Contractor’s use of
such munitions, explosives, radiation or radio-activity,  and
(v) natural catastrophes such as earthquake, hurricane, typhoon or volcanic
activity.  
If a Party is or will be prevented from performing any of its obligations under the
Contract by Force Majeure, then it shall give notice to the other Party of the event or
circumstances constituting the Force Majeure and shall specify the obligations, the
performance of which is or will be prevented. The notice shall be given within 14 days
after the Party became aware, or should have become aware, of the relevant event or
circumstance constituting Force Majeure.
56 Conditions of Contract for Construction
19Force Majeure
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 73 =====

57General Conditions
19.3
Duty to Minimise Delay
19.4
Consequences of Force
Majeure
19.5
Force Majeure Affecting 
Subcontractor
19.6
Optional Termination, 
Payment and Release
The Party shall, having given notice, be excused performance of such obligations for
so long as such Force Majeure prevents it from performing them.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Clause, Force Majeure shall not apply to
obligations of either Party to make payments to the other Party under the Contract.
Each Party shall at all times use all reasonable endeavours to minimise any delay in
the performance of the Contract as a result of Force Majeure.
A Party shall give notice to the other Party when it ceases to be affected by the Force
Majeure.  
If the Contractor is prevented from performing any of his obligations under the
Contract by Force Majeure of which notice has been given under Sub-Clause 19.2
[Notice of Force Majeure ], and suffers delay and/or incurs Cost by reason of such
Force Majeure, the Contractor shall be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 20.1
[Contractor’s Claims] to:
(a) an extension of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed,
under Sub-Clause 8.4 [Extension of Time for Completion], and
(b) if the event or circumstance is of the kind described in sub-paragraphs (i) to (iv)
of Sub-Clause 19.1 [ Definition of Force Majeure] and, in the case of sub-
paragraphs (ii) to (iv), occurs in the Country, payment of any such Cost.
After receiving this notice, the Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-
Clause 3.5 [Determinations] to agree or determine these matters. 
If any Subcontractor is entitled under any contract or agreement relating to the Works
to relief from force majeure on terms additional to or broader than those specified in
this Clause, such additional or broader force majeure events or circumstances shall
not excuse the Contractor’s non-performance or entitle him to relief under this Clause.
If the execution of substantially all the Works in progress is prevented for a continuous
period of 84 days by reason of Force Majeure of which notice has been given under
Sub-Clause 19.2 [Notice of Force Majeure], or for multiple periods which total more than
140 days due to the same notified Force Majeure, then either Party may give to the other
Party a notice of termination of the Contract. In this event, the termination shall take
effect 7 days after the notice is given, and the Contractor shall proceed in accordance
with Sub-Clause 16.3 [Cessation of Work and Removal of Contractor’s Equipment].
Upon such termination, the Engineer shall determine the value of the work done and
issue a Payment Certificate which shall include:
(a) the amounts payable for any work carried out for which a price is stated in the
Contract;
(b) the Cost of Plant and Materials ordered for the Works which have been
delivered to the Contractor, or of which the Contractor is liable to accept
delivery: this Plant and Materials shall become the property of (and be at the
risk of) the Employer when paid for by the Employer, and the Contractor shall
place the same at the Employer’s disposal;
(c) any other Cost or liability which in the circumstances was reasonably incurred
by the Contractor in the expectation of completing the Works;
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 74 =====

19.7
Release from
Performance
under the Law
20.1
Contractor’s Claims
(d) the Cost of removal of Temporary Works and Contractor’s Equipment from the
Site and the return of these items to the Contractor’s works in his country (or
to any other destination at no greater cost);  and
(e) the Cost of repatriation of the Contractor’s staff and labour employed wholly in
connection with the Works at the date of termination.  
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Clause, if any event or circumstance
outside the control of the Parties (including, but not limited to, Force Majeure) arises
which makes it impossible or unlawful for either or both Parties to fulfil its or their
contractual obligations or which, under the law governing the Contract, entitles the
Parties to be released from further performance of the Contract, then upon notice by
either Party to the other Party of such event or circumstance:
(a) the Parties shall be discharged from further performance, without prejudice to
the rights of either Party in respect of any previous breach of the Contract,  and
(b) the sum payable by the Employer to the Contractor shall be the same as would
have been payable under Sub-Clause 19.6 [Optional Termination, Payment and
Release] if the Contract had been terminated under Sub-Clause 19.6.  
If the Contractor considers himself to be entitled to any extension of the Time for
Completion and/or any additional payment, under any Clause of these Conditions or
otherwise in connection with the Contract, the Contractor shall give notice to the
Engineer, describing the event or circumstance giving rise to the claim. The notice
shall be given as soon as practicable, and not later than 28 days after the Contractor
became aware, or should have become aware, of the event or circumstance. 
If the Contractor fails to give notice of a claim within such period of 28 days, the Time
for Completion shall not be extended, the Contractor shall not be entitled to additional
payment, and the Employer shall be discharged from all liability in connection with the
claim. Otherwise, the following provisions of this Sub-Clause shall apply.
The Contractor shall also submit any other notices which are required by the Contract,
and supporting particulars for the claim, all as relevant to such event or circumstance.
The Contractor shall keep such contemporary records as may be necessary to
substantiate any claim, either on the Site or at another location acceptable to the
Engineer. Without admitting the Employer’s liability, the Engineer may, after receiving
any notice under this Sub-Clause, monitor the record-keeping and/or instruct the
Contractor to keep further contemporary records. The Contractor shall permit the
Engineer to inspect all these records, and shall (if instructed) submit copies to the
Engineer.
Within 42 days after the Contractor became aware (or should have become aware) of
the event or circumstance giving rise to the claim, or within such other period as may
be proposed by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer, the Contractor shall
send to the Engineer a fully detailed claim which includes full supporting particulars of
the basis of the claim and of the extension of time and/or additional payment claimed.
If the event or circumstance giving rise to the claim has a continuing effect:
(a) this fully detailed claim shall be considered as interim;
58 Conditions of Contract for Construction
20Claim, Disputes and Arbitration
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 75 =====

59General Conditions
20.2
Appointment of the 
Dispute Adjudication 
Board
(b) the Contractor shall send further interim claims at monthly intervals, giving the
accumulated delay and/or amount claimed, and such further particulars as the
Engineer may reasonably require;  and
(c) the Contractor shall send a final claim within 28 days after the end of the effects
resulting from the event or circumstance, or within such other period as may be
proposed by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer.
Within 42 days after receiving a claim or any further particulars supporting a previous
claim, or within such other period as may be proposed by the Engineer and approved
by the Contractor, the Engineer shall respond with approval, or with disapproval and
detailed comments. He may also request any necessary further particulars, but shall
nevertheless give his response on the principles of the claim within such time.
Each Payment Certificate shall include such amounts for any claim as have been
reasonably substantiated as due under the relevant provision of the Contract. Unless
and until the particulars supplied are sufficient to substantiate the whole of the claim,
the Contractor shall only be entitled to payment for such part of the claim as he has
been able to substantiate.
The Engineer shall proceed in accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 [ Determinations] to
agree or determine  (i) the extension (if any) of the Time for Completion (before or after
its expiry) in accordance with Sub-Clause 8.4 [ Extension of Time for Completion ],
and/or  (ii) the additional payment (if any) to which the Contractor is entitled under the
Contract.
The requirements of this Sub-Clause are in addition to those of any other Sub-Clause
which may apply to a claim. If the Contractor fails to comply with this or another Sub-
Clause in relation to any claim, any extension of time and/or additional payment shall
take account of the extent (if any) to which the failure has prevented or prejudiced
proper investigation of the claim, unless the claim is excluded under the second
paragraph of this Sub-Clause. 
Disputes shall be adjudicated by a DAB in accordance with Sub-Clause 20.4
[Obtaining Dispute Adjudication Board’s Decision ]. The Parties shall jointly appoint a
DAB by the date stated in the Appendix to Tender.
The DAB shall comprise, as stated in the Appendix to Tender, either one or three
suitably qualified persons (“the members”). If the number is not so stated and the
Parties do not agree otherwise, the DAB shall comprise three persons.
If the DAB is to comprise three persons, each Party shall nominate one member for
the approval of the other Party. The Parties shall consult both these members and
shall agree upon the third member, who shall be appointed to act as chairman.
However, if a list of potential members is included in the Contract, the members shall
be selected from those on the list, other than anyone who is unable or unwilling to
accept appointment to the DAB.
The agreement between the Parties and either the sole member (“adjudicator”) or
each of the three members shall incorporate by reference the General Conditions of
Dispute Adjudication Agreement contained in the Appendix to these General
Conditions, with such amendments as are agreed between them.
The terms of the remuneration of either the sole member or each of the three
members, including the remuneration of any expert whom the DAB consults, shall be
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 76 =====

20.3
Failure to Agree Dispute 
Adjudication Board
20.4
Obtaining Dispute 
Adjudication Board’s 
Decision
mutually agreed upon by the Parties when agreeing the terms of appointment. Each
Party shall be responsible for paying one-half of this remuneration.
If at any time the Parties so agree, they may jointly refer a matter to the DAB for it to
give its opinion. Neither Party shall consult the DAB on any matter without the
agreement of the other Party.
If at any time the Parties so agree, they may appoint a suitably qualified person or
persons to replace (or to be available to replace) any one or more members of the
DAB. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the appointment will come into effect if a
member declines to act or is unable to act as a result of death, disability, resignation
or termination of appointment.
If any of these circumstances occurs and no such replacement is available, a
replacement shall be appointed in the same manner as the replaced person was
required to have been nominated or agreed upon, as described in this Sub-Clause.
The appointment of any member may be terminated by mutual agreement of both
Parties, but not by the Employer or the Contractor acting alone. Unless otherwise
agreed by both Parties, the appointment of the DAB (including each member) shall
expire when the discharge referred to in Sub-Clause 14.12 [ Discharge] shall have
become effective.  
If any of the following conditions apply, namely:
(a) the Parties fail to agree upon the appointment of the sole member of the DAB
by the date stated in the first paragraph of Sub-Clause 20.2, [ Appointment of
the Dispute Adjudication Board]
(b) either Party fails to nominate a member (for approval by the other Party) of a
DAB of three persons by such date,
(c) the Parties fail to agree upon the appointment of the third member (to act as
chairman) of the DAB by such date,  or
(d) the Parties fail to agree upon the appointment of a replacement person within
42 days after the date on which the sole member or one of the three members
declines to act or is unable to act as a result of death, disability, resignation or
termination of appointment,
then the appointing entity or official named in the Appendix to Tender shall, upon the
request of either or both of the Parties and after due consultation with both Parties,
appoint this member of the DAB. This appointment shall be final and conclusive. Each
Party shall be responsible for paying one-half of the remuneration of the appointing
entity or official.  
If a dispute (of any kind whatsoever) arises between the Parties in connection with,
or arising out of, the Contract or the execution of the Works, including any dispute
as to any certificate, determination, instruction, opinion or valuation of the Engineer,
either Party may refer the dispute in writing to the DAB for its decision, with copies
to the other Party and the Engineer. Such reference shall state that it is given under
this Sub-Clause.
For a DAB of three persons, the DAB shall be deemed to have received such
reference on the date when it is received by the chairman of the DAB.
Both Parties shall promptly make available to the DAB all such additional information,
60 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 77 =====

61General Conditions
20.5
Amicable
Settlement
20.6
Arbitration
further access to the Site, and appropriate facilities, as the DAB may require for the
purposes of making a decision on such dispute. The DAB shall be deemed to be not
acting as arbitrator(s).
Within 84 days after receiving such reference, or within such other period as may be
proposed by the DAB and approved by both Parties, the DAB shall give its decision,
which shall be reasoned and shall state that it is given under this Sub-Clause. The
decision shall be binding on both Parties, who shall promptly give effect to it unless and
until it shall be revised in an amicable settlement or an arbitral award as described
below. Unless the Contract has already been abandoned, repudiated or terminated, the
Contractor shall continue to proceed with the Works in accordance with the Contract.
If either Party is dissatisfied with the DAB’s decision, then either Party may, within 28
days after receiving the decision, give notice to the other Party of its dissatisfaction. If
the DAB fails to give its decision within the period of 84 days (or as otherwise
approved) after receiving such reference, then either Party may, within 28 days after
this period has expired, give notice to the other Party of its dissatisfaction.
In either event, this notice of dissatisfaction shall state that it is given under this Sub-
Clause, and shall set out the matter in dispute and the reason(s) for dissatisfaction.
Except as stated in Sub-Clause 20.7 [ Failure to Comply with Dispute Adjudication
Board’s Decision] and Sub-Clause 20.8 [ Expiry of Dispute Adjudication Board’s
Appointment], neither Party shall be entitled to commence arbitration of a dispute
unless a notice of dissatisfaction has been given in accordance with this Sub-Clause.
If the DAB has given its decision as to a matter in dispute to both Parties, and no notice
of dissatisfaction has been given by either Party within 28 days after it received the
DAB’s decision, then the decision shall become final and binding upon both Parties.  
Where notice of dissatisfaction has been given under Sub-Clause 20.4 above, both
Parties shall attempt to settle the dispute amicably before the commencement of
arbitration. However, unless both Parties agree otherwise, arbitration may be
commenced on or after the fifty-sixth day after the day on which notice of dissatis-
faction was given, even if no attempt at amicable settlement has been made.  
Unless settled amicably, any dispute in respect of which the DAB’s decision (if any) has
not become final and binding shall be finally settled by international arbitration. Unless
otherwise agreed by both Parties:
(a) the dispute shall be finally settled under the Rules of Arbitration of the
International Chamber of Commerce,
(b) the dispute shall be settled by three arbitrators appointed in accordance with
these Rules,  and
(c) the arbitration shall be conducted in the language for communications defined
in Sub-Clause 1.4 [Law and Language].
The arbitrator(s) shall have full power to open up, review and revise any certificate,
determination, instruction, opinion or valuation of the Engineer, and any decision of the
DAB, relevant to the dispute. Nothing shall disqualify the Engineer from being called
as a witness and giving evidence before the arbitrator(s) on any matter whatsoever
relevant to the dispute.
Neither Party shall be limited in the proceedings before the arbitrator(s) to the evidence
or arguments previously put before the DAB to obtain its decision, or to the reasons
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 78 =====

20.7
Failure to Comply with 
Dispute Adjudication 
Board’s Decision
20.8
Expiry of Dispute 
Adjudication Board’s 
Appointment
1
for dissatisfaction given in its notice of dissatisfaction. Any decision of the DAB shall
be admissible in evidence in the arbitration.
Arbitration may be commenced prior to or after completion of the Works. The
obligations of the Parties, the Engineer and the DAB shall not be altered by reason of
any arbitration being conducted during the progress of the Works.  
In the event that:
(a) neither Party has given notice of dissatisfaction within the period stated in Sub-
Clause 20.4 [Obtaining Dispute Adjudication Board’s Decision],
(b) the DAB’s related decision (if any) has become final and binding,  and
(c) a Party fails to comply with this decision,
then the other Party may, without prejudice to any other rights it may have, refer the
failure itself to arbitration under Sub-Clause 20.6 [ Arbitration]. Sub-Clause 20.4
[Obtaining Dispute Adjudication Board’s Decision] and Sub-Clause 20.5 [ Amicable
Settlement] shall not apply to this reference.  
If a dispute arises between the Parties in connection with, or arising out of, the
Contract or the execution of the Works and there is no DAB in place, whether by
reason of the expiry of the DAB’s appointment or otherwise:
(a) Sub-Clause 20.4 [Obtaining Dispute Adjudication Board’s Decision ] and Sub-
Clause 20.5 [Amicable Settlement] shall not apply,  and
(b) the dispute may be referred directly to arbitration under Sub-Clause 20.6 
[Arbitration]. 
62 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 79 =====

63General Conditions
1
Definitions
2
General Provisions
3
Warranties
Each "Dispute Adjudication Agreement" is a tripartite agreement by and between:
(a) the "Employer";
(b) the "Contractor";  and
(c) the "Member" who is defined in the Dispute Adjudication Agreement as being:
(i) the sole member of the "DAB" (or "adjudicator") and, where this is the
case, all references to the "Other Members" do not apply,  or
(ii) one of the three persons who are jointly called the "DAB" (or "dispute
adjudication board") and, where this is the case, the other two persons
are called the "Other Members".
The Employer and the Contractor have entered (or intend to enter) into a contract,
which is called the "Contract" and is defined in the Dispute Adjudication Agreement,
which incorporates this Appendix. In the Dispute Adjudication Agreement, words and
expressions which are not otherwise defined shall have the meanings assigned to
them in the Contract.
Unless otherwise stated in the Dispute Adjudication Agreement, it shall take effect on
the latest of the following dates:
(a) the Commencement Date defined in the Contract,
(b) when the Employer, the Contractor and the Member have each signed the
Dispute Adjudication Agreement,  or
(c) when the Employer, the Contractor and each of the Other Members (if any)
have respectively each signed a dispute adjudication agreement.
When the Dispute Adjudication Agreement has taken effect, the Employer and the
Contractor shall each give notice to the Member accordingly. If the Member does not
receive either notice within six months after entering into the Dispute Adjudication
Agreement, it shall be void and ineffective.
This employment of the Member is a personal appointment. At any time, the Member
may give not less than 70 days' notice of resignation to the Employer and to the
Contractor, and the Dispute Adjudication Agreement shall terminate upon the expiry
of this period.
No assignment or subcontracting of the Dispute Adjudication Agreement is permitted
without the prior written agreement of all the parties to it and of the Other Members (if any).
The Member warrants and agrees that he/she is and shall be impartial and indep-
endent of the Employer, the Contractor and the Engineer. The Member shall promptly
disclose, to each of them and to the Other Members (if any), any fact or circumstance
which might appear inconsistent with his/her warranty and agreement of impartiality
and independence.
When appointing the Member, the Employer and the Contractor relied upon the
Member's representations that he/she is:
(a) experienced in the work which the Contractor is to carry out under the Contract,
(b) experienced in the interpretation of contract documentation,  and
(c) fluent in the language for communications defined in the Contract.
APPENDIX
General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 80 =====

4
General Obligations of 
the Member
5
General Obligations of 
the Employer and the 
Contractor
The Member shall:
(a) have no interest financial or otherwise in the Employer, the Contractor or the
Engineer, nor any financial interest in the Contract except for payment under the
Dispute Adjudication Agreement;
(b) not previously have been employed as a consultant or otherwise by the
Employer, the Contractor or the Engineer, except in such circumstances as
were disclosed in writing to the Employer and the Contractor before they
signed the Dispute Adjudication Agreement;
(c) have disclosed in writing to the Employer, the Contractor and the Other
Members (if any), before entering into the Dispute Adjudication Agreement and
to his/her best knowledge and recollection, any professional or personal
relationships with any director, officer or employee of the Employer, the
Contractor or the Engineer, and any previous involvement in the overall project
of which the Contract forms part;
(d) not, for the duration of the Dispute Adjudication Agreement, be employed as a
consultant or otherwise by the Employer, the Contractor or the Engineer,
except as may be agreed in writing by the Employer, the Contractor and the
Other Members (if any);
(e) comply with the annexed procedural rules and with Sub-Clause 20.4 of the
Conditions of Contract;
(f) not give advice to the Employer, the Contractor, the Employer's Personnel or
the Contractor's Personnel concerning the conduct of the Contract, other than
in accordance with the annexed procedural rules;
(g) not while a Member enter into discussions or make any agreement with the
Employer, the Contractor or the Engineer regarding employment by any of
them, whether as a consultant or otherwise, after ceasing to act under the
Dispute Adjudication Agreement;
(h) ensure his/her availability for all site visits and hearings as are necessary;
(i) become conversant with the Contract and with the progress of the Works (and
of any other parts of the project of which the Contract forms part) by studying
all documents received which shall be maintained in a current working file;
(j) treat the details of the Contract and all the DAB's activities and hearings as private
and confidential, and not publish or disclose them without the prior written
consent of the Employer, the Contractor and the Other Members (if any); and
(k) be available to give advice and opinions, on any matter relevant to the Contract
when requested by both the Employer and the Contractor, subject to the
agreement of the Other Members (if any).
The Employer, the Contractor, the Employer's Personnel and the Contractor's
Personnel shall not request advice from or consultation with the Member regarding the
Contract, otherwise than in the normal course of the DAB's activities under the
Contract and the Dispute Adjudication Agreement, and except to the extent that prior
agreement is given by the Employer, the Contractor and the Other Members (if any).
The Employer and the Contractor shall be responsible for compliance with this
provision, by the Employer's Personnel and the Contractor's Personnel respectively.
The Employer and the Contractor undertake to each other and to the Member that
the Member shall not, except as otherwise agreed in writing by the Employer, the
Contractor, the Member and the Other Members (if any):
(a) be appointed as an arbitrator in any arbitration under the Contract;
(b) be called as a witness to give evidence concerning any dispute before
arbitrator(s) appointed for any arbitration under the Contract; or
(c) be liable for any claims for anything done or omitted in the discharge or
purported discharge of the Member's functions, unless the act or omission is
shown to have been in bad faith.
64 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 81 =====

65General Conditions
6
Payment
The Employer and the Contractor hereby jointly and severally indemnify and hold the
Member harmless against and from claims from which he is relieved from liability
under the preceding paragraph.
Whenever the Employer or the Contractor refers a dispute to the DAB under Sub-
Clause 20.4 of the Conditions of Contract, which will require the Member to make a
site visit and attend a hearing, the Employer or the Contractor shall provide
appropriate security for a sum equivalent to the reasonable expenses to be incurred
by the Member. No account shall be taken of any other payments due or paid to the
Member.
The Member shall be paid as follows, in the currency named in the Dispute
Adjudication Agreement:
(a) a retainer fee per calendar month, which shall be considered as payment in full
for:
(i) being available on 28 days' notice for all site visits and hearings;
(ii) becoming and remaining conversant with all project developments and
maintaining relevant files;
(iii) all office and overhead expenses including secretarial services,
photocopying and office supplies incurred in connection with his duties;
and
(iv) all services performed hereunder except those referred to in sub-
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this Clause.
The retainer fee shall be paid with effect from the last day of the calendar month
in which the Dispute Adjudication Agreement becomes effective; until the last
day of the calendar month in which the Taking-Over Certificate is issued for the
whole of the Works.
With effect from the first day of the calendar month following the month in
which Taking-Over Certificate is issued for the whole of the Works, the retainer
fee shall be reduced by 50%. This reduced fee shall be paid until the first day
of the calendar month in which the Member resigns or the Dispute Adjudication
Agreement is otherwise terminated.
(b) a daily fee which shall be considered as payment in full for:
(i) each day or part of a day up to a maximum of two days' travel time
in each direction for the journey between the Member's home and
the site, or another location of a meeting with the Other Members (if
any);
(ii) each working day on site visits, hearings or preparing decisions; and
(iii) each day spent reading submissions in preparation for a hearing.
(c) all reasonable expenses incurred in connection with the Member's duties,
including the cost of telephone calls, courier charges, faxes and telexes, travel
expenses, hotel and subsistence costs: a receipt shall be required for each
item in excess of five percent of the daily fee referred to in sub-paragraph (b) of
this Clause;
(d) any taxes properly levied in the Country on payments made to the Member
(unless a national or permanent resident of the Country) under this Clause 6.
The retainer and daily fees shall be as specified in the Dispute Adjudication
Agreement. Unless it specifies otherwise, these fees shall remain fixed for the first 24
calendar months, and shall thereafter be adjusted by agreement between the
Employer, the Contractor and the Member, at each anniversary of the date on which
the Dispute Adjudication Agreement became effective.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 82 =====

7
Termination
8
Default of the Member
9
Disputes
The Member shall submit invoices for payment of the monthly retainer and air fares
quarterly in advance. Invoices for other expenses and for daily fees shall be submitted
following the conclusion of a site visit or hearing. All invoices shall be accompanied by
a brief description of activities performed during the relevant period and shall be
addressed to the Contractor.
The Contractor shall pay each of the Member's invoices in full within 56 calendar days
after receiving each invoice and shall apply to the Employer (in the Statements under
the Contract) for reimbursement of one-half of the amounts of these invoices. The
Employer shall then pay the Contractor in accordance with the Contract.
If the Contractor fails to pay to the Member the amount to which he/she is entitled
under the Dispute Adjudication Agreement, the Employer shall pay the amount due to
the Member and any other amount which may be required to maintain the operation
of the DAB; and without prejudice to the Employer's rights or remedies. In addition to
all other rights arising from this default, the Employer shall be entitled to
reimbursement of all sums paid in excess of one-half of these payments, plus all costs
of recovering these sums and financing charges calculated at the rate specified in
Sub-Clause 14.8 of the Conditions of Contract.
If the Member does not receive payment of the amount due within 70 days after
submitting a valid invoice, the Member may (i) suspend his/her services (without
notice) until the payment is received, and/or (ii) resign his/her appointment by giving
notice under Clause 7.
At any time: (i) the Employer and the Contractor may jointly terminate the Dispute
Adjudication Agreement by giving 42 days' notice to the Member; or (ii) the Member
may resign as provided for in Clause 2.
If the Member fails to comply with the Dispute Adjudication Agreement, the
Employer and the Contractor may, without prejudice to their other rights, terminate
it by notice to the Member. The notice shall take effect when received by the
Member.
If the Employer or the Contractor fails to comply with the Dispute Adjudication
Agreement, the Member may, without prejudice to his other rights, terminate it by
notice to the Employer and the Contractor. The notice shall take effect when received
by them both.
Any such notice, resignation and termination shall be final and binding on the
Employer, the Contractor and the Member. However, a notice by the Employer or the
Contractor, but not by both, shall be of no effect.
If the Member fails to comply with any obligation under Clause 4, he/she shall not be
entitled to any fees or expenses hereunder and shall, without prejudice to their other
rights, reimburse each of the Employer and the Contractor for any fees and expenses
received by the Member and the Other Members (if any), for proceedings or decisions
(if any) of the DAB which are rendered void or ineffective.
Any dispute or claim arising out of or in connection with this Dispute Adjudication
Agreement, or the breach, termination or invalidity thereof, shall be finally settled under
the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce by one arbitrator
appointed in accordance with these Rules of Arbitration.
66 Conditions of Contract for Construction
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 83 =====

67General Conditions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Unless otherwise agreed by the Employer and the Contractor, the DAB shall visit the
site at intervals of not more than 140 days, including times of critical construction
events, at the request of either the Employer or the Contractor. Unless otherwise
agreed by the Employer, the Contractor and the DAB, the period between consecutive
visits shall not be less than 70 days, except as required to convene a hearing as
described below.
The timing of and agenda for each site visit shall be as agreed jointly by the DAB, the
Employer and the Contractor, or in the absence of agreement, shall be decided by the
DAB. The purpose of site visits is to enable the DAB to become and remain acquainted
with the progress of the Works and of any actual or potential problems or claims.
Site visits shall be attended by the Employer, the Contractor and the Engineer and
shall be co-ordinated by the Employer in co-operation with the Contractor. The
Employer shall ensure the provision of appropriate conference facilities and secretarial
and copying services. At the conclusion of each site visit and before leaving the site,
the DAB shall prepare a report on its activities during the visit and shall send copies
to the Employer and the Contractor.
The Employer and the Contractor shall furnish to the DAB one copy of all documents
which the DAB may request, including Contract documents, progress reports,
variation instructions, certificates and other documents pertinent to the performance
of the Contract. All communications between the DAB and the Employer or the
Contractor shall be copied to the other Party. If the DAB comprises three persons, the
Employer and the Contractor shall send copies of these requested documents and
these communications to each of these persons.
If any dispute is referred to the DAB in accordance with Sub-Clause 20.4 of the
Conditions of Contract, the DAB shall proceed in accordance with Sub-Clause 20.4
and these Rules. Subject to the time allowed to give notice of a decision and other
relevant factors, the DAB shall:
(a) act fairly and impartially as between the Employer and the Contractor, giving
each of them a reasonable opportunity of putting his case and responding to
the other's case, and
(b) adopt procedures suitable to the dispute, avoiding unnecessary delay or
expense.
The DAB may conduct a hearing on the dispute, in which event it will decide on the
date and place for the hearing and may request that written documentation and
arguments from the Employer and the Contractor be presented to it prior to or at the
hearing.
Except as otherwise agreed in writing by the Employer and the Contractor, the DAB
shall have power to adopt an inquisitorial procedure, to refuse admission to hearings
or audience at hearings to any persons other than representatives of the Employer, the
Contractor and the Engineer, and to proceed in the absence of any party who the DAB
is satisfied received notice of the hearing; but shall have discretion to decide whether
and to what extent this power may be exercised.
Annex PROCEDURAL RULES
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 84 =====

68 Conditions of Contract for Construction
8
9
The Employer and the Contractor empower the DAB, among other things, to:
(a) establish the procedure to be applied in deciding a dispute, 
(b) decide upon the DAB's own jurisdiction, and as to the scope of any dispute
referred to it,
(c) conduct any hearing as it thinks fit, not being bound by any rules or procedures
other than those contained in the Contract and these Rules,
(d) take the initiative in ascertaining the facts and matters required for a decision,
(e) make use of its own specialist knowledge, if any, 
(f) decide upon the payment of financing charges in accordance with the
Contract,
(g) decide upon any provisional relief such as interim or conservatory measures,
and
(h) open up, review and revise any certificate, decision, determination, instruction,
opinion or valuation of the Engineer, relevant to the dispute.
The DAB shall not express any opinions during any hearing concerning the merits of
any arguments advanced by the Parties. Thereafter, the DAB shall make and give its
decision in accordance with Sub-Clause 20.4, or as otherwise agreed by the
Employer and the Contractor in writing. If the DAB comprises three persons:
(a) it shall convene in private after a hearing, in order to have discussions and
prepare its decision;
(b) it shall endeavour to reach a unanimous decision: if this proves impossible the
applicable decision shall be made by a majority of the Members, who may
require the minority Member to prepare a written report for submission to the
Employer and the Contractor;  and
(c) if a Member fails to attend a meeting or hearing, or to fulfil any required function,
the other two Members may nevertheless proceed to make a decision, unless:
(i) either the Employer or the Contractor does not agree that they do so,  or
(ii) the absent Member is the chairman and he/she instructs the other
Members to not make a decision.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 85 =====

iGeneral Conditions
Sub-Clause Page
Accepted Contract Amount, Sufficiency of the 4.11 16
Access after Taking Over, Right of 11.7 34
Access for Inspection 7.3 24
Access Route 4.15 17
Access to the Site, Right of 2.1 8
Additional Facilities 4.13 17
Addresses for Communications 1.3 5
Adjudication Board 20.2 59
Adjustments for Changes in Cost 13.8 39
Adjustments for Changes in Legislation 13.7 39
Advance Payment 14.2 41
Agreement, Contract 1.6 6
Amicable Settlement 20.5 61
Approvals, Permits, Licences or 2.2 9
Arbitration 20.6 61
Assignment 1.7 6
Assignment of Benefit of Subcontract 4.5 14
Assistance by the Employer 2.2 9
Assistants, Engineer's 3.2 10
Authorities, Delays Caused by 8.5 28
Avoidance of Interference 4.14 17
Care of the Works 17.2 51
Certificate, Application for Final Payment 14.11 45
Certificate, Final Payment 14.13 46
Certificate, Performance 11.9 34
Certificate, Taking-Over 10.1 29
Certificates, Application for Interim Payment 14.3 41
Certificates, copies to be sent 1.3 5
Certificates, Interim Payment 14.6 43
Claims, Employer's 2.5 9
Claims Procedure 20.1 58
Clearance of Site after Performance Certificate 11.11 34
Clearance of Site after Taking-Over Certificate 4.23 20
Commencement of Works 8.1 26
Communications 1.3 5
Communications, Language for 1.4 5
Completion of Outstanding Work and Remedying Defects 11.1 32
Completion, Statement at 14.10 45
Completion, Time for 8.2 26
Conditions, Unforeseeable Physical 4.12 16
Confidential Details 1.12 8
Contract Price, The 14.1 40
Contractor to Search 11.8 34
Contractor's Claims 20.1 58
Contractor's Design 4.1 12
Contractor's Documents, Employer's Use of 1.10 7
Contractor's Entitlement to Suspend Work 16.1 49
Contractor's Equipment 4.17 18
INDEX OF SUB-CLAUSES
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 86 =====

Contractor's General Obligations 4.1 12
Contractor's Liability, Cessation of 2.5 9
Contractor's Liability, Limitation of 17.6 52
Contractor's Obligations: Tests on Completion 9.1 29
Contractor's Operations on Site 4.23 20
Contractor's Personnel 6.9 23
Contractor's Personnel and Equipment, Records of 6.10 23
Contractor's Representative 4.3 13
Contractor's Superintendence 6.8 23
Co-operation 4.6 14
Cost, Adjustments for Changes in 13.8 39
Currencies for Payment of Variations 13.4 38
Currencies of Payment 14.15 46
DAB  -  see Dispute Adjudication Board
Data on Conditions at the Site 4.10 15
Daywork 13.6 38
Default of Contractor, Notice of 15.1 47
Default of Contractor: Termination 15.2 47
Default of Employer: Entitlement to Suspend Work 16.1 49
Default of Employer: Termination 16.2 49
Defective Work, Removal of 11.5 34
Defects, Failure to Remedy 11.4 33
Defects Notification Period, Extension of 11.3 33
Defects, Remedying of 11.1 32
Defects, Searching for Cause of 11.8 34
Definition of "nominated Subcontractor" 5.1 21
Definitions 1.1 1
Delay Damages 8.7 28
Delays Caused by Authorities 8.5 28
Delegation by the Engineer 3.2 10
Design by the Contractor 4.1 12
Determinations by the Engineer 3.5 11
Discharge 14.12 45
Disorderly Conduct 6.11 23
Dispute Adjudication Board, Appointment of the 20.2 59
Dispute Adjudication Board, Failure to Agree 20.3 60
Dispute Adjudication Board's Appointment, Expiry of 20.8 62
Dispute Adjudication Board's Decision, Failure to Comply with 20.7 62
Dispute Adjudication Board's Decision, Obtaining 20.4 60
Disputes, Amicable Settlement of 20.5 61
Disputes, Arbitration of 20.6 61
Disputes, Failure to Comply with Dispute Adjudication
Board's Decision on 20.7 62
Disputes: Obtaining Dispute Adjudication Board's Decision 20.4 60
Documents, Care and Supply of 1.8 6
Documents, Contractor's Use of Employer's 1.11 7
Documents, Employer's Use of Contractor's 1.10 7
Documents, Priority of 1.5 6
Drawings or Instructions, Delayed 1.9 7
Electricity, Water and Gas 4.19 18
Electronic Transmission of Communications 1.3 5
Employer's Claims 2.5 9
Employer's Claims: Currencies of Payment 14.15 46
Employer's Documents, Contractor's Use of 1.11 7
ii
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 87 =====

iii
Employer's Entitlement to Termination 15.5 48
Employer's Equipment and Free-Issue Material 4.20 18
Employer's Financial Arrangements 2.4 9
Employer's Liability, Cessation of 14.14 46
Employer's Personnel 2.3 9
Employer's Risks 17.3 51
Employer's Risks, Consequences of 17.4 52
Engineer, Delegation by the 3.2 10
Engineer, Instructions of the 3.3 11
Engineer, Replacement of 3.4 11
Engineer to act for the Employer 3.1 10
Engineer's Determinations 3.5 11
Engineer's Duties and Authority 3.1 10
Environment, Protection of the 4.18 18
Evaluation 12.3 35
Evidence of Payments to Nominated Subcontractors 5.4 21
Extension of Defects Notification Period 11.3 33
Extension of Time for Completion 8.4 27
Failure to Pass Tests on Completion 9.4 30
Final Payment Certificate, Application for 14.11 45
Final Payment Certificate, Issue of 14.13 46
Finances, Employer's 2.4 9
Force Majeure Affecting Subcontractor 19.5 57
Force Majeure, Consequences of 19.4 57
Force Majeure, Definition of 19.1 56
Force Majeure, Notice of 19.2 56
Force Majeure: Optional Termination 19.6 57
Fossils 4.24 20
Frustration of the Contract 19.7 58
Gas, Electricity, Water and 4.19 18
Goods, Transport of 4.16 18
Health and Safety 6.7 22
Indemnities 17.1 50
Inspection 7.3 24
Instructions, Delayed Drawings or 1.9 7
Instructions of the Engineer 3.3 11
Insurance against Injury to Persons and Damage to 
Property 18.3 55
Insurance for Contractor's Personnel 18.4 56
Insurance for Works and Contractor's Equipment 18.2 53
Insurances, General Requirements for 18.1 53
Intellectual Property Rights, Claims for Infringement of 17.5 52
Intellectual Property Rights in Contractor's Documents 1.10 7
Intellectual Property Rights in Employer's Documents 1.11 7
Interference, Avoidance of 4.14 17
Interference with Tests on Completion 10.3 32
Interim Payment Certificates, Application for 14.3 41
Interim Payment Certificates, Issue of 14.6 43
Interpretation 1.2 5
Joint and Several Liability 1.14 8
Labour, Engagement of Staff and 6.1 22
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 88 =====

Labour, Facilities for Staff and 6.6 22
Language 1.4 5
Law, Governing 1.4 5
Laws, Compliance with 1.13 8
Laws, Labour 6.4 22
Legislation, Adjustments for Changes in 13.7 39
Liability, Cessation of Contractor's 2.5 9
Liability, Cessation of Employer's 14.14 46
Liability, Joint and Several 1.14 8
Liability, Limitation of 17.6 52
Liability Unaffected by Insurances 18.1 53
Licences or Approvals, Permits, 2.2 9
Manner of Execution 7.1 24
Materials in Event of Suspension, Payment for 8.10 29
Materials, Ownership of 7.7 26
Materials, Payment for Unfixed 14.5 42
Materials supplied by the Employer 4.20 18
Measurement, Method of 12.2 35
Measurement of the Works 12.1 35
Nominated Subcontractor, Definition of 5.1 21
Nominated Subcontractors, Evidence of Payments 5.4 21
Nominated Subcontractors, Payments to 5.3 21
Nomination, Objection to 5.2 21
Notice of Intention to Deliver 4.16 18
Notice to Correct 15.1 47
Notices, Addresses for 1.3 5
Obligations, after Performance Certificate 11.10 34
Obligations, Contractor's General 4.1 12
Omissions 12.4 36
Other contractors 4.6 14
Payment 14.7 44
Payment after Termination by the Contractor 16.4 50
Payment after Termination by the Employer 15.4 48
Payment, Currencies of 14.15 46
Payment, Delayed 14.8 44
Payment for Plant and Materials for the Works 14.5 42
Payment in Applicable Currencies 13.4 38
Payment to Contractor after Force Majeure 19.4 57
Payments, Schedule of 14.4 42
Payments to nominated Subcontractors 5.3 21
Performance Certificate 11.9 34
Performance Security 4.2 12
Permits, Licences or Approvals 2.2 9
Personnel and Equipment, Records of Contractor's 6.10 23
Personnel, Contractor's 6.9 23
Personnel, Disorderly Conduct by 6.11 23
Personnel, Employer's 2.3 9
Personnel, Insurance for Contractor's 18.4 56
Persons in the Service of Employer 6.3 22
Plant and Materials for the Works, Payment for 14.5 42
Plant and Materials in Event of Suspension, Payment for 8.10 29
Plant and Materials, Ownership of 7.7 26
iv
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 89 =====

v
Programme 8.3 26
Progress, Rate of 8.6 28
Progress Reports 4.21 19
Provisional Sums 13.5 38
Quality Assurance 4.9 15
Records of Contractor's Personnel and Equipment 6.10 23
Regulations and Laws, Compliance with 1.13 8
Rejection 7.5 25
Release from Performance under the Law 19.7 58
Remedial Work 7.6 25
Remedy Defects, Failure to 11.4 33
Remedying Defects 11.1 32
Remedying Defects, Cost of 11.2 33
Removal of Contractor's Equipment after Termination 16.3 50
Replacement of the Engineer 3.4 11
Reports on Progress 4.21 19
Representative, Contractor's 4.3 13
Representative, Engineer's 3.2 10
Responsibility for the Works 4.1 12
Responsibility Unaffected by Engineer's Approval 3.1 10
Resumption of Work after Suspension 8.12 29
Retention, Deduction of 14.3 41
Retention Money, Payment of 14.9 44
Retesting after Failure of Tests on Completion 9.3 30
Right to Vary 13.1 36
Rights, Intellectual Property, in Contractor's Documents 1.10 7
Rights, Intellectual Property, in Employer's Documents 1.11 7
Rights of Way and Facilities 4.13 17
Rights, Patent 17.5 52
Risks, Employer's 17.3 51
Royalties 7.8 26
Safety and Health 6.7 22
Safety Procedures 4.8 15
Samples 7.2 24
Schedule of Payments 14.4 42
Search, Contractor to 11.8 34
Security, Performance 4.2 12
Setting Out 4.7 15
Site, Clearance of 11.11 34
Site, Contractor's Operations on 4.23 20
Site Data 4.10 15
Site, Right of Access to the 2.1 8
Site, Security of the 4.22 20
Staff and Labour, Engagement of 6.1 22
Staff and Labour, Facilities for 6.6 22
Statement at Completion 14.10 45
Statement, Final 14.11 45
Statement, Interim 14.3 41
Statutes, Regulations and Laws, Compliance with 1.13 8
Subcontract, Assignment of Benefit of 4.5 14
Subcontractor, Force Majeure Affecting 19.5 57
Subcontractors 4.4 14
Subcontractors, nominated 5.1 21
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 90 =====

vi
Superintendence, Contractor's 6.8 23
Surfaces Requiring Reinstatement 10.4 32
Suspension, Consequences of 8.9 29
Suspension due to Employer's Default 16.1 49
Suspension of Work 8.8 28
Suspension, Payment for Plant and Materials in Event of 8.10 29
Suspension, Prolonged 8.11 29
Suspension, Resumption of Work after 8.12 29
Taking Over of Parts of the Works 10.2 31
Taking Over of the Works and Sections 10.1 30
Taking Over: Surfaces Requiring Reinstatement 10.4 31
Termination by the Contractor 16.2 49
Termination by the Contractor, Payment after 16.4 50
Termination by the Employer 15.2 47
Termination by the Employer, Optional 15.5 48
Termination by the Employer, Payment after 15.4 48
Termination, Optional: after Force Majeure 19.6 57
Termination, Optional: at Employer's Convenience 15.5 48
Termination, Valuation at Date of 15.3 48
Termination: Cessation of Work 16.3 50
Testing 7.4 24
Tests, Further 11.6 33
Tests on Completion 9.1 29
Tests on Completion, Delayed 9.2 30
Tests on Completion, Failure to Pass 9.4 30
Tests on Completion, Interference with 10.3 32
Third Party Insurance 18.3 55
Time for Completion 8.2 26
Time for Completion, Extension of 8.4 27
Time for Payment 14.7 44
Transport of Goods 4.16 18
Tribunal, Appointment of Dispute Adjudication Board 20.2 59
Unforeseeable Physical Conditions 4.12 16
Unfulfilled Obligations 11.10 34
Valuation at Date of Termination 15.3 48
Value Engineering 13.2 37
Variation Procedure 13.3 37
Variations 13.1 36
Variations: Applicable Currencies 13.4 38
Wages and Conditions of Labour 6.2 22
Water and Gas 4.19 18
Working Hours 6.5 22
Works and Contractor's Equipment, Insurance for 18.2 54
Works, Contractor's Care of the 17.2 51
Works, Measurement and Evaluation 12.3 35
Works to be Measured 12.1 35
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 91 =====

FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES INGENIEURS-CONSEILS
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF CONSULTING ENGINEERS
INTERNATIONALE VEREINIGUNG BERATENDER INGENIEURE
FEDERACION INTERNACIONAL DE INGENIEROS CONSOLTORES
GENERAL CONDITIONS
GUIDANCE FOR THE
PREPARATION OF
PARTICULAR CONDITIONS
FORMS OF LETTER OF
TENDER, CONTRACT
AGREEMENT AND 
DISPUTE AD
JUDICATION
AGREEMENT
Conditions of Contract
for CONSTRUCTION
FOR BUILDING AND ENGINEERING WORKS
DESIGNED BY THE EMPLOYER
Guidance for the Preparation of Particular
Conditions 
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 92 =====

Guidance
for the Preparation of Particular Conditions
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
NOTES ON THE PREPARATION OF TENDER DOCUMENTS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1 General Provisions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2 The Employer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3 The Engineer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
4 The Contractor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
5 Nominated Subcontractors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
6 Staff and Labour  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
7 Plant, Materials and Workmanship  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
8 Commencement, Delays and Suspension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
9 Tests on Completion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
10 Employer’s Taking Over  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
11 Defects Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
12 Measurement and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
13 Variations and Adjustments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
14 Contract Price and Payment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
15 Termination by Employer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
16 Suspension and Termination by Contractor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
17 Risk and Responsibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
18 Insurance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
19 Force Majeure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
20 Claims, Disputes and Arbitration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
ANNEXES FORMS OF SECURITY  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
1
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 93 =====

2
Guidance for the Preparation of Particular Conditions
INTRODUCTION
The terms of the Conditions of Contract for Construction have been prepared by the Fédération
Internationale des Ingénieurs-Conseils (FIDIC) and are recommended for general use for the
purpose of the construction (excluding most design) of building or engineering works where tenders
are invited on an international basis. Modifications to the Conditions may be required in some legal
jurisdictions, particularly if they are to be used on domestic contracts.
Under the usual arrangements for this type of contract, the Contractor constructs the works in
accordance with design details provided by the Employer or his representative, the Engineer.
Although these Conditions allow for the possibility that the Contractor may be required to design
parts of the permanent works, they are not intended for use where most of the works are designed
by the Contractor. For these Works, it would be more appropriate to utilise FIDIC's Conditions of
Contract for Plant and Design-Build or Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey Projects.
The guidance hereafter is intended to assist writers of the Particular Conditions by giving options
for various sub-clauses where appropriate. As far as possible, example wording is included,
between lines. In some cases, however, only an aide-memoire is given.
Before incorporating any example wording, it must be checked to ensure that it is wholly suitable
for the particular circumstances. Unless it is considered suitable, example wording should be
amended before use.
Where example wording is amended, and in all cases where other amendments or additions are
made, care must be taken to ensure that no ambiguity is created, either with the General Conditions
or between the clauses in the Particular Conditions.
In the preparation of the Conditions of Contract to be included in the tender documents for a
contract, the following text can be used:
The Conditions of Contract comprise the "General Conditions", which form part of the
"Conditions of Contract for Construction" First Edition 1999 published by the
Fédération Internationale des Ingénieurs-Conseils (FIDIC), and the following "Particular
Conditions", which include amendments and additions to such General Conditions.
There are no Sub-Clauses in the General Conditions which require data to be included in the
Particular Conditions. As noted in sub-paragraph (ii) of the Foreword, the General Conditions refer
to any necessary data being contained in the Appendix to Tender or (for technical matters) in the
Specification.
FIDIC has published a document entitled "Tendering Procedure" which presents a systematic
approach to the selection of tenderers and the obtaining and evaluation of tenders; the second
edition was published in 1994. The document is intended to assist the Employer to receive sound
competitive tenders with a minimum of qualifications. FIDIC intends to update Tendering Procedure
and to publish a guide to the use of these Conditions of Contract for Construction.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 94 =====

3
Notes on the Preparation of Tender Documents
The tender documents should be prepared by suitably-qualified engineers who are familiar with the
technical aspects of the required works, and a review by suitably-qualified lawyers may be
advisable. The tender documents issued to tenderers will consist of the Conditions of Contract, the
Specification, the Drawings, and the Letter of Tender and Schedules for completion by the Tenderer.
For this type of contract, where the Works are valued by measurement, the Bill of Quantities will
usually be the most important Schedule. A Daywork Schedule may also be necessary, to cover
minor works to be evaluated at cost. In addition, each of the Tenderers should receive the data
referred to in Sub-Clause 4.10, and the Instructions to Tenderers to advise them of any special
matters which the Employer wishes them to take into account when pricing the Bill of Quantities
but which are not to form part of the Contract. When the Employer accepts the Letter of Tender,
the Contract (which then comes into full force and effect) includes these completed Schedules.
The Specification may include the matters referred to in some or all of the following Sub-Clauses:
1.8 Requirements for Contractor's Documents
1.13 Permissions being obtained by the Employer
2.1 Phased possession of foundations, structures, plant or means of access
4.1 Contractor's designs
4.6 Other contractors (and others) on the Site
4.7 Setting-out points, lines and levels of reference
4.14 Third parties
4.18 Environmental constraints
4.19 Electricity, water, gas and other services available on the Site
4.20 Employer's Equipment and free-issue material
5.1 Nominated Subcontractors
6.6 Facilities for Personnel
7.2 Samples
7.4 Testing during manufacture and/or construction
9.1 Tests on Completion
13.5 Provisional Sums
Many Sub-Clauses in the General Conditions make reference to data being contained in the
Appendix to Tender, providing a convenient location for the data which is usually required. The
example form in this publication thus provides a check-list of the data required; but there is no
indication, either in the General Conditions or in the example Appendix to Tender, that this data is
either prescribed by the Employer or inserted by the Tenderer. The Employer should prepare the
Appendix to Tender, based on this example form, with the elements completed to the extent of his
requirements.
The Employer may also require other data from Tenderers, and include a questionnaire in the
Schedules.
The Instructions to Tenderers may need to specify any constraints on the completion of the
Appendix to Tender and/or Schedules, and/or specify the extent of other information which each
Tenderer is to include with his Tender. If each Tenderer is to produce a parent company guarantee
and/or a tender security, these requirements (which apply prior to the Contract becoming effective)
should be included in the Instructions to Tenderers: example forms are annexed to this document
as Annexes A and B. The Instructions may include matters referred to in some or all of the following
Sub-Clauses:
4.3 Contractor's Representative (name and curriculum vitae)
4.9 Quality Assurance system
9.1 Tests on Completion
18 Insurances
20 Resolution of disputes
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 95 =====

4 except: example text between lines may be copied
Clause 1 General Provisions
Sub-Clause 1.1 Definitions
It may be necessary to amend some of the definitions. For example:
1.1.3.1 the Base Date could be defined as a particular calendar date
1.1.4.6 one particular Foreign Currency may be required by the financing institution
1.1.4.8 a different currency may be required to be the contract Local Currency
1.1.6.2 the references to "Country" may be inappropriate for a cross-border Site
Sub-Clause 1.2 Interpretation
If the references to "profit" are to be more precisely specified, this Sub-Clause may be varied:
EXAMPLE At the end of Sub-Clause 1.2, insert:
In these Conditions, provisions including the expression "Cost plus
reasonable profit" require this profit to be one-twentieth (5%) of this Cost.
Sub-Clause 1.5 Priority of Documents
An order of precedence is usually necessary, in case a conflict is subsequently found among the
contract documents. If no order of precedence is to be prescribed, this Sub-Clause may be
varied:
EXAMPLE Delete Sub-Clause 1.5 and substitute:
The documents forming the Contract are to be taken as mutually
explanatory of one another. If an ambiguity or discrepancy is found, the
priority shall be such as may be accorded by the governing law. The
Engineer has authority to issue any instruction which he considers
necessary to resolve an ambiguity or discrepancy.
Sub-Clause 1.6 Contract Agreement
The form of Agreement should be included in the tender documents as an annex to the Particular
Conditions: an example form is included at the end of this publication. If lengthy tender
negotiations were necessary, it may be considered advisable for the Contract Agreement to
record the Accepted Contract Amount, Base Date and/or Commencement Date. Entry into an
Agreement may be necessary under applicable law.
Sub-Clause 1.14  Joint and Several Liability 
For a major contract, detailed requirements for the joint venture may need to be specified. For
example, it may be desirable for each member to produce a parent company guarantee: an
example form is annexed to this document as Annex A.
These requirements, which apply prior to the Contract becoming effective, should be included in
the Instructions to Tenderers. The Employer will wish the leader of the joint venture to be
appointed at an early stage, providing a single point of contact thereafter, and will not wish to be
involved in a dispute between the members of a joint venture. The Employer should scrutinise the
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 96 =====

5except: example text between lines may be copied
joint venture agreement carefully, and it may have to be approved by the project's financing
institutions.
Additional Sub-Clause Details to be Confidential
If confidentiality is required, an additional sub-clause may be added:
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE
The Contractor shall treat the details of the Contract as private and
confidential, except to the extent necessary to carry out obligations
under it or to comply with applicable Laws. The Contractor shall not
publish, permit to be published, or disclose any particulars of the Works
in any trade or technical paper or elsewhere without the previous
agreement of the Employer.
Clause 2 The Employer
Sub-Clause 2.1 Right of Access to the Site
If right of access cannot be granted, both early and thereafter exclusively, details should be given
in the Specification.
Sub-Clause 2.3  Employer's Personnel
These provisions should be reflected in the Employer's contracts with any other contractors on the Site.
Clause 3 The Engineer
Sub-Clause 3.1 Engineer's Duties and Authority
Any requirements for Employer's approval should be set out in the Particular Conditions:
EXAMPLE
The Engineer shall obtain the specific approval of the Employer before
taking action under the following Sub-Clauses of these Conditions:
(a)  Sub-Clause **
(b) Sub-Clause **
** (insert number; describe action, unless all require approval)
This list should be extended or reduced as necessary. If the obligation to obtain the approval of the
Employer only applies beyond certain limits, financial or otherwise, the example wording should be
varied.
Additional Sub-Clause Management Meetings
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE
The Engineer or the Contractor's Representative may require the other
to attend a management meeting in order to review the arrangements for
future work. The Engineer shall record the business of management
meetings and supply copies of the record to those attending the meeting
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 97 =====

6 except: example text between lines may be copied
and to the Employer. In the record, responsibilities for any actions to be
taken shall be in accordance with the Contract.
Clause 4 The Contractor
Sub-Clause 4.1 Contractor's General Obligations
Occasionally, there may be an item of Temporary Works for which the Contractor will not be fully
responsible. For example, the Contract may specify temporary arrangements for river diversion
which have been designed by the Engineer. In these cases, the Sub-Clause may require
amendment, taking account of the type of this item of Temporary Works, and of the extent of the
Employer's responsibility.
Sub-Clause 4.2 Performance Security
The acceptable form(s) of Performance Security should be included in the tender documents,
annexed to the Particular Conditions. Example forms are annexed to this document as Annex C
and Annex D. They incorporate two sets of Uniform Rules published by the International Chamber
of Commerce (the "ICC", which is based at 38 Cours Albert 1er, 75008 Paris, France), which also
publishes guides to these Uniform Rules. These example forms and the wording of the Sub-Clause
may have to be amended to comply with applicable law.
EXAMPLE At the end of the second paragraph of Sub-Clause 4.2, insert:
If the Performance Security is in the form of a bank guarantee, it shall
be issued either (a) by a bank located in the Country, or (b) directly by a
foreign bank acceptable to the Employer. If the Performance Security is
not in the form of a bank guarantee, it shall be furnished by a financial
entity registered, or licensed to do business, in the Country.
Sub-Clause 4.3 Contractor's Representative
If the Representative is known at the time of submission of the Tender, the Tenderer may propose
the Representative. The Tenderer may wish to propose alternatives, especially if the contract award
seems likely to be delayed. If the ruling language is not the same as the language for day to day
communications (under Sub-Clause 1.4), or if for any other reason it is necessary to stipulate that
the Contractor's Representative shall be fluent in a particular language, one of the following
sentences may be added.
EXAMPLE At the end of Sub-Clause 4.3, add:
The Contractor's Representative and all these persons shall also be
fluent in (insert name of language)
EXAMPLE At the end of Sub-Clause 4.3, add:
If the Contractor's Representative, or these persons, is not fluent in
(insert name of language), the Contractor shall make a
competent interpreter available during all working hours.
Sub-Clause 4.4 Subcontractors
The wording in the General Conditions includes the conditions which will usually be applicable. If
less (or no) consent is required, some (or all) of sub-paragraphs (a) to (d) may be deleted, or
qualified in the Particular Conditions:
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 98 =====

7except: example text between lines may be copied
EXAMPLE Prior consent shall not be required if the value of the subcontract is less
than 0.01% of the Accepted Contract Amount.
A sentence may be added to increase the extent to which consent is required:
EXAMPLE
The prior consent of the Engineer shall be obtained to the suppliers of
the following Materials:
(insert details: for example, specific manufactured or prefabricated items)
A sentence may be added in order to encourage the Contractor to use local contractors:
EXAMPLE Where practicable, the Contractor shall give a fair and reasonable
opportunity for contractors from the Country to be appointed as Sub-
contractors.
Sub-Clause 4.8 Safety Procedures
If the Contractor is sharing occupation of the Site with others, it may not be appropriate for him to
provide some of the listed items. In these circumstances, the Employer's obligations should be
specified.
Sub-Clause 4.9 Quality Assurance
The wording in the General Conditions imposes the requirement of a quality assurance system
in accordance with details specified in the Contract. If inappropriate, this Sub-Clause may be
deleted.
Sub-Clause 4.12 Unforeseeable Physical Conditions
In the case of major sub-surface works, the allocation of the risk of sub-surface conditions is an
aspect which should be considered when tender documents are being prepared. If this risk is to be
shared between the parties, the Sub-Clause may be amended:
EXAMPLE Delete sub-paragraph (b) of Sub-Clause 4.12 and substitute:
(b) payment for any such Cost, per cent ( %) of
which shall be included in the Contract Price (the balance
percent of the Cost shall be borne by the Contractor) .
Sub-Clause 4.17 Contractor's Equipment
If the Contractor is not to provide all the Contractor's Equipment necessary to complete the Works,
the Employer's obligations should be specified: see Sub-Clause 4.20. If vesting of Contractor's
Equipment is required, further paragraphs may be added, subject to their being consistent with
applicable laws:
EXAMPLE At the end of Sub-Clause 4.17, add the following paragraphs:
Contractor's Equipment which is owned by the Contractor (either
directly or indirectly) shall be deemed to be the property of the
Employer with effect from its arrival on the Site. This vesting of property
shall not:
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 99 =====

8 except: example text between lines may be copied
(a) affect the responsibility or liability of the Employer,
(b) prejudice the right of the Contractor to the sole use of the vested
Contractor's Equipment for the purpose of the Works,  or
(c) affect the Contractor's responsibility to operate and maintain
Contractor's Equipment.
The property in each item shall be deemed to revest in the Contractor
when he is entitled either to remove it from the Site or to receive the
Taking-Over Certificate for the Works, whichever occurs first.
Sub-Clause 4.19 Electricity, Water and Gas
If services are to be available for the Contractor to use, the Specification should give details,
including locations and prices.
Sub-Clause 4.20 Employer's Equipment and Free-Issue Material
For this Sub-Clause to apply, the Specification should describe each item which the Employer will
provide and/or operate and should specify all necessary details. With some types of facilities,
further provisions may be necessary, in order to clarify aspects such as liability and insurance.
Sub-Clause 4.22 Security of the Site
If the Contractor is sharing occupation of the Site with others, it may not be appropriate for him
to be responsible for its security. In these circumstances, the Employer's obligations should be
specified.
Clause 5 Nominated Subcontractors
In most cases under Sub-Clause 4.4, the Contractor selects Subcontractors, subject to any constraints
specified in the Contract. Clause 5 provides for the particular situation whereby the Employer may
select a Subcontractor, although the second sentence of Sub-Clause 4.4 should still apply.
The sub-paragraphs of Sub-Clause 5.2 indicate some of the problems which may have to be overcome.
If a nominated Subcontractor is to be required, full details should be included in the tender
documents. If the Employer anticipates that a Subcontractor is to be instructed under Clause 13
but is not to be a nominated Subcontractor, Clause 5 should be amended, describing the particular
circumstances.
Clause 6 Staff and Labour
Sub-Clause 6.5 Working Hours
If the Employer does not wish to specify working hours in the Appendix to Tender, or to restrict
them to the times specified by the Tenderer (in order to plan the Engineer's supervision, for
example), this Sub-Clause may be deleted.
Sub-Clause 6.6 Facilities for Staff and Labour
If the Employer will make some accommodation available, his obligations to do so should be
specified.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 100 =====

9except: example text between lines may be copied
Sub-Clause 6.8 Contractor's Superintendence
If the ruling language is not the same as the language for day to day communications (under Sub-
Clause 1.4), or if for any other reason it is necessary to stipulate that the Contractor's
superintending staff shall be fluent in a particular language, the following sentence may be
added.
EXAMPLE
Insert at the end of Sub-Clause 6.8:
A reasonable proportion of the Contractor's superintending staff shall
have a working knowledge of
(insert name of language),
or the Contractor shall have a sufficient number of competent
interpreters available on Site during all working hours.
Additional Sub-Clauses
It may be necessary to add a few sub-clauses to take account of the circumstances and locality of
the Site:
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE
Foreign Staff and Labour
The Contractor may import any personnel who are necessary for the
execution of the Works. The Contractor must ensure that these
personnel are provided with the required residence visas and work
permits. The Contractor shall be responsible for the return to the place
where they were recruited or to their domicile of imported Contractor's
Personnel. In the event of the death in the Country of any of these
personnel or members of their families, the Contractor shall similarly be
responsible for making the appropriate arrangements for their return or
burial.
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE
Measures against Insect and Pest Nuisance
The Contractor shall at all times take the necessary precautions to
protect all staff and labour employed on the Site from insect and pest
nuisance, and to reduce their danger to health. The Contractor shall
provide suitable prophylactics for the Contractor's Personnel and shall
comply with all the regulations of the local health authorities, including
use of appropriate insecticide.
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE
Alcoholic Liquor or Drugs
The Contractor shall not, otherwise than in accordance with the Laws of
the Country, import, sell, give, barter or otherwise dispose of any
alcoholic liquor or drugs, or permit or allow importation, sale, gift, barter
or disposal by Contractor's Personnel.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 101 =====

10 except: example text between lines may be copied
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE
Arms and Ammunition
The Contractor shall not give, barter or otherwise dispose of to any
person, any arms or ammunition of any kind, or allow Contractor's
Personnel to do so.
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE
Festivals and Religious Customs
The Contractor shall respect the Country's recognised festivals, days of
rest and religious or other customs.
Clause 7 Plant, Materials and Workmanship
Additional Sub-Clause
If the Contract is being financed by an institution whose rules or policies require a restriction on the
use of its funds, a further sub-clause may be added:
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE
All Goods shall have their origin in eligible source countries as defined in
(insert name of published guidelines for procurement).
Goods shall be transported by carriers from these eligible source
countries, unless exempted by the Employer in writing on the basis of
potential excessive costs or delays. Surety, insurance and banking
services shall be provided by insurers and bankers from the eligible
source countries.
Clause 8 Commencement, Delays and Suspension
Sub-Clause 8.2 Time for Completion
If the Works are to be taken-over in stages, these stages should be defined as Sections, in the
Appendix to Tender.
Sub-Clause 8.7 Delay Damages
Under many legal systems, the amount of these pre-defined damages must represent a reasonable
pre-estimate of the Employer's probable loss in the event of delay. If the Accepted Contract Amount
is to be quoted as the sum of figures in more than one currency, it may be preferable to define these
damages (per day) as the percentage reduction which would be applied to each of these figures. If
the Accepted Contract Amount is expressed in the Local Currency, the damages per day may either
be defined as a percentage or be defined as a figure in Local Currency: see Sub-Clause 14.15(b).
Additional Sub-Clause
Incentives for early completion may be included in the tender documents (although Sub-Clause
13.2 refers to accelerated completion):
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 102 =====

11except: example text between lines may be copied
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE
Sections are required to be completed by the dates given in the
Appendix to Tender in order that these Sections may be occupied and
used by the Employer in advance of the completion of the whole of the
Works. Details of the work required to be executed to entitle the
Contractor to bonus payments and the amount of the bonuses are
stated in the Specification.
For the purposes of calculating bonus payments, the dates given in the
Appendix to Tender for completion of Sections are fixed. No adjustments
of the dates by reason of granting an extension of the Time for
Completion will be allowed.
Clause 9 Tests on Completion
Sub-Clause 9.1 Contractor's Obligations
The Specification should describe the tests which the Contractor is to carry out before being entitled
to a Taking-Over Certificate. If the Works are to be tested and taken-over in stages, the tests
requirements may have to take account of the effect of some parts of the Works being incomplete.
Clause 10 Employer's Taking Over
Sub-Clause 10.1 Taking-Over Certificate
If the Works are to be taken-over in stages, these stages should to be defined as Sections, in the
Appendix to Tender. Precise geographical definitions are advisable, and the Appendix should
include a table, so as to define the Time for Completion and delay damages: the table is shown in
the example Appendix.
Clause 11 Defects Liability
Sub-Clause 11.10 Unfulfilled Obligations
It may be necessary to review this Sub-Clause for the period of liability imposed by the applicable law.
Clause 12 Measurement and Evaluation
Sub-Clause 12.1 Works to be Measured
If any part of the Permanent Works is to be measured according to records of its construction,
details should be specified in the tender documents, including any records for which the Contractor
is to be responsible.
Clause 13 Variations and Adjustments
Variations can be initiated by any of three ways:
(a) the Engineer may instruct the variation under Sub-Clause 13.1, without prior agreement as
to feasibility or price;
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 103 =====

12 except: example text between lines may be copied
(b) the Contractor may initiate his own proposals under Sub-Clause 13.2, which are intended
to benefit both Parties;  or
(c) the Engineer may request a proposal under Sub-Clause 13.3, seeking prior agreement so
as to minimise dispute.
Sub-Clause 13.8 Adjustments for Changes in Cost
These provisions for adjustments may be required if it would be unreasonable for the Contractor to
bear the risk of escalating costs due to inflation. Unless this Sub-Clause is not to apply, the
Appendix to Tender should include a table for each of the currencies of payment: the appropriate
table is shown in the example Appendix. Particular care should be taken in the calculation of the
weightings/coefficients ("a", "b", "c", ..., the total of which must not exceed unity) and in the
selection and verification of cost indices. Expert advice may be appropriate.
Clause 14 Contract Price and Payment
Sub-Clause 14.1 The Contract Price
When writing the Particular Conditions, consideration should be given to the amount and timing of
payment(s) to the Contractor. A positive cash flow is clearly of benefit to the Contractor, and
tenderers will take account of the interim payment procedures when preparing their tenders.
Additional Sub-Clauses may be required to cover any exceptions to the options set out in Sub-
Clause 14.1, and any other matters relating to payment.
Cost-plus contracts, under which the actual Costs are determined and paid, are unusual and only
used when (for reasons of urgency or otherwise) the Employer is willing to accept the risks
involved. If the Contractor is to be paid actual Costs, Clause 12 should be replaced by provisions
describing the method of determining the Costs and Contract Price. As a result, the provisions in
the General Conditions which entitle the Contractor to payment of additional Costs will generally
be of no effect.
Sub-Clause 14.1(a) would not apply if payment is to be made on a lump sum basis.
Lump sum contracts may be suitable if the tender documents include details which are sufficiently
complete for construction and for Variations to be unlikely. From the information supplied in the
tender documents, the Contractor can prepare any other details necessary, and construct the
Works, without having to refer back to the Engineer for clarification or further information.
Further design by the Contractor (under sub-paragraphs (a) to (d) of Sub-Clause 4.1) is not
precluded. However, these Conditions would be inappropriate if significant design input by the
Contractor is required. In those cases, FIDIC's other forms may be more appropriate: see FIDIC's
Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-Build or Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey
Projects.
For a lump sum contract, the tender documents should include a schedule of payments (see Sub-
Clause 14.4), and any drawings required for construction may be specified as being Contractor's
Documents. The Specification should describe the procedures under which the Contractor submits
these Documents for the Engineer to approve.
EXAMPLE PROVISIONS FOR A LUMP SUM CONTRACT
Delete Clause 12.
Delete the last sentence of Sub-Clause 13.3 and substitute:
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 104 =====

13except: example text between lines may be copied
Upon instructing or approving a Variation, the Engineer shall proceed in
accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 to agree or determine adjustments to
the Contract Price and to the schedule of payments under Sub-Clause
14.4. These adjustments shall include reasonable profit, and shall take
account of the Contractor's submissions under Sub-Clause 13.2 if
applicable.
Delete sub-paragraph (a) of Sub-Clause 14.1 and substitute:
(a) the Contract Price shall be the lump sum Accepted Contract
Amount and be subject to adjustments in accordance with the
Contract;
If Sub-Clause 14.1(b) is not to apply, additional Sub-Clause(s) should be added.
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE ON EXEMPTION FROM DUTIES
All Goods imported by the Contractor into the Country shall be exempt
from customs and other import duties, if the Employer's prior written
approval is obtained for import. The Employer shall endorse the
necessary exemption documents prepared by the Contractor for
presentation in order to clear the Goods through Customs, and shall also
provide the following exemption documents:
(describe the necessary documents, which the Contractor will be unable
to prepare)
If exemption is not then granted, the customs duties payable and paid
shall be reimbursed by the Employer.
All imported Goods, which are not incorporated in or expended in
connection with the Works, shall be exported on completion of the
Contract. If not exported, the Goods will be assessed for duties as
applicable to the Goods involved in accordance with the Laws of the
Country.
However, exemption may not available for:
(a) Goods which are similar to those locally produced, unless they are
not available in sufficient quantities or are of a different standard to
that which is necessary for the Works;  and
(b) any element of duty or tax inherent in the price of goods or
services procured in the Country, which shall be deemed to be
included in the Accepted Contract Amount.
Port dues, quay dues and, except as set out above, any element of tax
or duty inherent in the price of goods or services shall be deemed to be
included in the Accepted Contract Amount.
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE ON EXEMPTION FROM TAXES
Expatriate (foreign) personnel shall not be liable for income tax levied in
the Country on earnings paid in any foreign currency, or for income tax
levied on subsistence, rentals and similar services directly furnished by
the Contractor to Contractor's Personnel, or for allowances in lieu. If any
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 105 =====

14 except: example text between lines may be copied
Contractor's Personnel have part of their earnings paid in the
Country in a foreign currency, they may export (after the conclusion
of their term of service on the Works) any balance remaining of their
earnings paid in foreign currencies.
The Employer shall seek exemption for the purposes of this Sub-
Clause. If it is not granted, the relevant taxes paid shall be
reimbursed by the Employer.
Sub-Clause 14.2 Advance Payment
When writing the Particular Conditions, consideration should be given to the benefits of
advance payment(s). Unless this Sub-Clause is not to apply, the total advance payment (and
the number of instalments if more than one) must be specified in the Appendix to Tender. The
rate of deduction for the repayments should be checked to ensure that repayment is achieved
before completion. The typical figures in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of the General Conditions
Sub-Clause are based on the assumption that the total advance payment is less than 22% of
the Accepted Contract Amount.
The acceptable form(s) of guarantee should be included in the tender documents, annexed to
the Particular Conditions: an example form is annexed to this document, as Annex E.
Sub-Clause 14.7 Payment
If a different period for payment is to apply, the Sub-Clause may be amended:
EXAMPLE In sub-paragraph (b) of Sub-Clause 14.7, delete  "56"  and substitute
"42"
If the country/countries of payment need to be specified, details may be included in a Schedule.
Sub-Clause 14.8 Delayed Payment
If the discount rate of the central bank in the country of the currency of payment is not a
reasonable basis for assessing the Contractor's financing costs, a new rate may have to be
defined. Alternatively, the actual financing Costs could be paid, taking account of local financing
arrangements.
Sub-Clause 14.9 Payment of Retention Money
If part of the Retention Money is to be released and substituted by an appropriate guarantee,
an additional Sub-Clause may be added. The acceptable form(s) of guarantee should be
included in the tender documents, annexed to the Particular Conditions: an example form is
annexed to this document, as Annex F.
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE FOR RELEASE OF RETENTION
When the Retention Money has reached three-fifths (60%) of the limit
of Retention Money stated in the Appendix to Tender, the Engineer
shall certify and the Employer shall make payment of half (50%) of
the limit of Retention Money to the Contractor if he obtains a
guarantee, in a form and provided by an entity approved by the
Employer, in amounts and currencies equal to the payment.
The Contractor shall ensure that the guarantee is valid and
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 106 =====

15except: example text between lines may be copied
enforceable until the Contractor has executed and completed the Works
and remedied any defects, as specified for the Performance Security in
Sub-Clause 4.2, and shall be returned to the Contractor accordingly.
This release of retention shall be in lieu of the release of the second half
of the Retention Money under the second paragraph of Sub-Clause
14.9.
Sub-Clause 14.15 Currencies of Payment
If all payments are to be made in Local Currency, it must be named in the Letter of Tender, and only
the first sentence of this Sub-Clause will apply. Alternatively, the Sub-Clause may then be replaced:
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE FOR A SINGLE CURRENCY CONTRACT
The currency of account shall be the Local Currency and all payments
made in accordance with the Contract shall be in Local Currency. The
Local Currency payments shall be fully convertible, except those for local
costs. The percentage attributed to local costs shall be as stated in the
Appendix to Tender.
Financing Arrangements
For major contracts in some markets, there may be a need to secure finance from entities such as
aid agencies, development banks, export credit agencies, or other international financing
institutions. If financing is to be procured from any of these sources, the Particular Conditions may
need to incorporate its special requirements. The exact wording will depend on the relevant
institution, so reference will need to be made to them to ascertain their requirements, and to seek
approval of the draft tender documents.
These requirements may include tendering procedures which need to be adopted in order to render
the eventual contract eligible for financing, and/or special Sub-Clauses which may need to be
incorporated into the Particular Conditions. The following examples indicate some of the topics
which the institution's requirements may cover:
(a) prohibition from discrimination against the shipping companies of any one country;
(b) ensuring that the Contract is subject to a widely-accepted neutral law;
(c) provision for arbitration under recognised international rules and at a neutral location;
(d) giving the Contractor the right to suspend/terminate in the event of default under the
financing arrangements;
(e) restricting the right to reject Plant;
(f) specifying the payments due in the event of termination;
(g) specifying that the Contract does not become effective until certain conditions precedent have
been satisfied, including pre-disbursement conditions for the financing arrangements;  and
(h) obliging the Employer to make payments from his own resources if, for any reason, the
funds under the financing arrangements are insufficient to meet the payments due to the
Contractor, whether due to a default under the financing arrangements or otherwise.
In addition, the financing institution or bank may wish the Contract to include references to the
financing arrangements, especially if funding from more than one source is to be arranged to
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 107 =====

16 except: example text between lines may be copied
finance different elements of supply. It is not unusual for the Particular Conditions to include special
provisions identifying different categories of Plant and specifying the documents to be presented to
the relevant financing institution to obtain payment. If the financing institution's requirements are not
met, it may be difficult (or even impossible) to secure suitable financing for the project, and/or the
institution may decline to provide finance for part or all of the Contract.
However, where the financing is not tied to the export of goods and services from any particular
country but is simply provided by commercial banks lending to the Employer, those banks may be
concerned to ensure that the Contractor's rights are very restricted. These banks may wish the
Contract to exclude any reference to the financing arrangements, and/or to restrict the Contractor's
rights under Clause 16.
FORM OF SUB-CLAUSE  WHICH A FINANCING INSTITUTION MAY REQUIRE
The Accepted Contract Amount is made up as follows:
(breakdown into items and/or into supply/delivery/etc)
and shall be payable by the Employer to the Contractor as set out below.
(a) % of the Accepted Contract Amount shall be payable by a
direct payment from the Employer to the Contractor within 28
days of receipt by the Employer of the following documents:
(i) commercial invoice addressed to the Employer specifying
the amount of the payment now due,
(ii) advance payment security guarantee issued by 
Bank in the form annexed,
(iii) performance security guarantee issued by Bank
in the form annexed,  and
(iv) Interim Payment Certificate confirming the payment due
and specifying the amount.
(b) % of the contract price for the supply of Plant shall be
payable as follows:
(i) % of the estimated contract value of the Plant
supplied, by direct payment from the Employer to the
Contractor on shipment of each item, against the following
documents:
(original) commercial invoice,
(original) shipping documents,
(original) certificate of origin,
(original) insurance certificate,  and
(original) Interim Payment Certificate confirming the
payment due and specifying the amount.
(ii) % of the estimated contract value of the Plant
supplied, by disbursement from the Loan Agreement to the
Contractor on shipment of each item, on presentation of a
Qualifying Certificate in the form annexed and copies of the
documents listed in sub-paragraph (b)(i) above.
(c) the balance of the Contract Price shall be payable as follows:
(i) % of the estimated contract value of the services
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 108 =====

17except: example text between lines may be copied
rendered, by direct payment from the Employer to the
Contractor on execution of the relevant service, against the
following documents:
(original) commercial invoice,  and
(original) Interim Payment Certificate confirming the
payment due and specifying the amount.
(ii) % of the estimated contract value of the services
rendered, by disbursement from the Loan Agreement to
the Contractor, on presentation of a Qualifying Certificate in
the form annexed and copies of the documents listed in
sub-paragraph (c)(i) above.
(d) The direct payments by the Employer specified in sub-paragraph
(b) shall be made by an irrevocable letter of credit established by
the Employer in favour of the Contractor and confirmed by a bank
acceptable to the Contractor. 
The above arrangements (involving financing institution(s), Employer and Contractor) may be
initiated by the Employer; or by the Contractor, before submitting the Tender. Alternatively, the
Contractor may be prepared to initiate financing arrangements and retain responsibility for them,
although he would probably be unable or unwilling to provide finance from his own resources. His
financing bank's requirements would then affect his attitude in contract negotiations. They might
well require the Employer to make interim payments, although a large proportion of the Contract
Price might be withheld until the Works are complete.
This payment arrangement can be achieved either by a high Percentage of Retention; or by a
suitably completed schedule of payments (see Sub-Clause 14.4), with the Instructions to Tenderers
specifying the criteria with which the Tenderer should comply. Since the Contractor would then
have to arrange his own financing to cover the shortfall between the payments and his outgoings,
he (and his financing bank) would probably require some form of security, guaranteeing payment
when due.
It may be appropriate for the Employer, when preparing the tender documents, to anticipate the
latter requirement by undertaking to provide a guarantee for the element of payment which the
Contractor is to receive when the Works are complete. The acceptable form(s) of guarantee should
be included in the tender documents, annexed to the Particular Conditions: an example form is
annexed to this document, as Annex G. The following Sub-Clause may be added. 
EXAMPLE PROVISIONS FOR CONTRACTOR FINANCE
The Employer shall obtain (at his cost) a payment guarantee in the
amount and currencies, and provided by an entity, as stated in the
Appendix to Tender. The Employer shall deliver the guarantee to the
Contractor within 28 days after both Parties have entered into the
Contract Agreement. The guarantee shall be in the form annexed to
these Particular Conditions, or in another form acceptable to the
Contractor. Unless and until the Contractor receives the guarantee, the
Engineer shall not give the notice under Sub-Clause 8.1.
The guarantee shall be returned to the Employer at the earliest of the
following dates:
(a) when the Contractor has been paid the Accepted Contract Amount;
(b) when obligations under the guarantee expire or have been
discharged;  or
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 109 =====

18 except: example text between lines may be copied
(c) when the Employer has performed all obligations under the Contract.
Clause 15 Termination by Employer
Sub-Clause 15.2 Termination by Employer
Before inviting tenders, the Employer should verify that the wording of this Sub-Clause, and each
anticipated ground for termination, is consistent with the law governing the Contract.
Sub-Clause 15.5 Employer's Entitlement to Termination
Unless inconsistent with the requirements of the Employer and/or financing institutions, a further
sentence may be added.
EXAMPLE Insert at the end of Sub-Clause 15.5:
The Employer shall also pay to the Contractor the amount of any other
loss or damage resulting from this termination.
Clause 16 Suspension and Termination by Contractor
Sub-Clause 16.2 Termination by Contractor
Before inviting tenders, the Employer should verify that the wording of this Sub-Clause is consistent
with the law governing the Contract. The Contractor should verify that each anticipated ground for
termination is consistent with such law.
Clause 17 Risk and Responsibility
Sub-Clause 17.6 Limitation of Liability
EXAMPLE
In Sub-Clause 17.6, the sum referred to in the penultimate sentence
shall be 
Additional Sub-Clause Use of Employer's Accommodation/Facilities
If the Contractor is to occupy the Employer's facilities temporarily, an additional sub-clause may be
added:
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE
The Contractor shall take full responsibility for the care of the items
detailed below, from the respective dates of use or occupation by the
Contractor, up to the respective dates of hand-over or cessation of
occupation (where hand-over or cessation of occupation may take
place after the date stated in the Taking-Over Certificate for the
Works):
(insert details)
If any loss or damage happens to any of the above items while the
Contractor is responsible for their care, arising from any cause
whatsoever other than those for which the Employer is liable, the
Contractor shall, at his own cost, rectify the loss or damage to the
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 110 =====

19except: example text between lines may be copied
satisfaction of the Engineer.
Clause 18 Insurance
The wording in the General Conditions describes the insurances which are to be arranged by the
"insuring Party", who is to be the Contractor unless otherwise stated in the Particular Conditions.
Insurances so provided by the Contractor are to be consistent with the general terms agreed with
the Employer. The Instructions to Tenderers may therefore require tenderers to provide details of the
proposed terms.
If the Employer is to arrange any of the insurances under this Clause, the tender documents should
include details as an annex to the Particular Conditions (so that tenderers can estimate what other
insurances they wish to have for their own protection), including the conditions, limits, exceptions
and deductibles; preferably in the form of a copy of each policy. The Employer may find it difficult
to effect the insurances described in the third paragraph of Sub-Clause 18.2 (for Contractor's
Equipment, which includes Subcontractor's equipment), because the Employer may not know the
amount or value of these items of equipment. The following sentence may be included in the
Particular Conditions:
EXAMPLE Delete the final paragraph of Sub-Clause 18.2 and substitute:
However, the insurances described in the first two paragraphs of Sub-
Clause 18.2 shall be effected and maintained by the Employer as
insuring Party, and not by the Contractor.
Clause 19 Force Majeure
Before inviting tenders, the Employer should verify that the wording of this Clause is compatible with
the law governing the Contract.
Clause 20 Claims, Disputes and Arbitration
Sub-Clause 20.2 Appointment of the Dispute Adjudication Board
Unless the Engineer (although appointed by the Employer) is to make the pre-arbitral decisions
under this Clause 20, in accordance with the alternative option described below, the Contract
should include the provisions under Clause 20 which, whilst not discouraging the Parties from
reaching agreement on disputes as the works proceed, allow them to refer contentious matters to
an impartial dispute adjudication board ("DAB").
The adjudication procedure depends for its success on, amongst other things, the Parties'
confidence in the agreed individual(s) who will serve on the DAB. Therefore, it is essential that
candidates for this position are not imposed by either Party on the other Party; and that, if the
individual is selected under Sub-Clause 20.3, the selection is made by a wholly impartial entity.
FIDIC is prepared to perform this role, if this authority has been delegated in accordance with the
example wording in the Appendix to Tender.
It is preferable, but not essential, for the individual(s) to be agreed before the Letter of Acceptance
is issued, and for the DAB to visit the Site on a regular basis. Under the example text in the
Appendix to Tender, the Parties may either so agree before the Letter of Acceptance is issued or
agree the appointment within the specified period thereafter. Alternatively, the Parties may prefer
to defer the appointment until a dispute has arisen, in which case Sub-Clause 20.2 plus the
Appendix - General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement with its Annex (Procedural
Rules) and the Dispute Adjudication Agreement should be amended to comply with the wording
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 111 =====

20 except: example text between lines may be copied
contained in the corresponding sections of FIDIC’s Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design -
Build.
Sub-Clause 20.2 provides for two alternative arrangements for the DAB:
(a) one person, who acts as the sole member of the DAB, having entered into a tripartite
agreement with both Parties;  or
(b) a DAB of three persons, each of whom has entered into a tripartite agreement with both Parties.
The form of this tripartite agreement could be one of the two alternatives shown at the end of this
publication, as appropriate to the arrangement adopted. Both of these forms incorporate (by
reference) the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement, which are included as the
Appendix to the General Conditions because they are also referred to in Sub-Clause 20.2. Under
either of these alternative forms of Dispute Adjudication Agreement, each individual person is
referred to as a Member.
At an early stage, consideration should be given as to whether a one-person or three-person DAB
is preferable for a particular project, taking account of its size, duration and the fields of expertise
which will be involved. For some projects, it may be considered appropriate to appoint a one-
person DAB for each major field of expertise relevant to the Works; however, this may give rise to
problems if, when a dispute arises, the Parties cannot agree which field is applicable and, there-
fore, to whom the dispute should be referred.
For a one-person DAB to be mutually agreed, the Employer (or the tenderer) could propose the
names and curriculum vitae of suitable persons, for the tenderer (or the Employer) to accept. It may
be advisable to propose alternates in case some subsequently decline the appointment, assuming
that they have not previously indicated their willingness to accept. Each Party may be reluctant to
choose names from a list of people who have already been contacted by the other Party.
For a three-person DAB, the Employer and the tenderer may each propose one member, similar to
the above procedure, for the tenderer and the Employer respectively to accept. For the chairman, the
Employer (or the tenderer) could similarly propose suitable persons for the tenderer (or the Employer)
to accept. It may be appropriate for the chairman's retainer fee to be more than that of the other two
members, reflecting the additional administrative tasks which a chairman will have to perform.
The appointment of the DAB may be facilitated, especially if the members are not to be appointed
at the commencement of the Contract, by including an agreed list of potential members in the
Contract: in a Schedule.
Alternatively, the Engineer may make these pre-arbitral decisions. This alternative, which has been
the Engineer's traditional role in common law countries, may be appropriate if the Engineer is an
independent professional consulting engineer with the experience and resources required for the
administration of all aspects of the contract. The Employer should recognise that, although the
Engineer generally acts for the Employer as specified in Sub-Clause 3.1(a), the Engineer will make
these pre-arbitral decisions impartially and the Employer must not prejudice this impartiality. If this
alternative is considered appropriate, the Sub-Clause may be varied:
EXAMPLE SUB-CLAUSE FOR PRE-ARBITRAL DECISIONS BY THE ENGINEER
Delete Sub-Clauses 20.2 and 20.3.
Delete the second paragraph of Sub-Clause 20.4 and substitute:
The Engineer shall act as the DAB in accordance with this Sub-Clause
20.4, acting fairly, impartially and at the cost of the Employer. In the event
that the Employer intends to replace the Engineer, the Employer's notice
under Sub-Clause 3.4 shall include detailed proposals for the
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 112 =====

21except: example text between lines may be copied
appointment of a replacement DAB.
Sub-Clause 20.5 Amicable Settlement
The provisions of this Sub-Clause are intended to encourage the parties to settle a dispute
amicably, without the need for arbitration: for example, by direct negotiation, conciliation, mediation,
or other forms of alternative dispute resolution. Amicable settlement procedures often depend, for
their success, on confidentiality and on both Parties' acceptance of the procedure. Therefore,
neither Party should seek to impose the procedure on the other Party.
Sub-Clause 20.6 Arbitration
The Contract should include provisions for the resolution by international arbitration of any disputes
which are not resolved amicably. In international contracts, international commercial arbitration has
numerous advantages over litigation in national courts, and may be more acceptable to the Parties.
Careful consideration should be given to ensuring that the international arbitration rules chosen are
compatible with the provisions of Clause 20 and with the other elements to be set out in the
Appendix to Tender. The Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (the "ICC",
which is based at 38 Cours Albert 1er, 75008 Paris, France) are frequently included in international
contracts. In the absence of specific stipulations as to the number of arbitrators and the place of
arbitration, the International Court of Arbitration of the ICC will decide on the number of arbitrators
(typically three in any substantial construction dispute) and on the place of arbitration.
If the UNCITRAL (or other non-ICC) arbitration rules are preferred, it may be necessary to designate,
in the Appendix to Tender, an institution to appoint the arbitrators or to administer the arbitration,
unless the institution is named (and their role specified) in the arbitration rules. It may also be
necessary to ensure, before so designating an institution in the Appendix to Tender, that it is
prepared to appoint or administer.
For major projects tendered internationally, it is desirable that the place of arbitration be situated in
a country other than that of the Employer or Contractor. This country should have a modern and
liberal arbitration law and should have ratified a bilateral or multilateral convention (such as the 1958
New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards), or both, that
would facilitate the enforcement of an arbitral award in the states of the Parties.
It may be considered desirable in some cases for other Parties to be joined into any arbitration
between the Parties, thereby creating a multi-party arbitration. While this may be feasible, multi-
party arbitration clauses require skilful drafting, and usually need to be prepared on a case-by-case
basis. No satisfactory standard form of multi-party arbitration clause for international use has yet
been developed.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 113 =====

22
Acceptable form(s) of security should be included in the tender documents: for Annex A and/or B,
in the Instructions to Tenderers; and for Annexes C to G, annexed to the Particular Conditions. The
following example forms, which (except for Annex A) incorporate Uniform Rules published by the
International Chamber of Commerce (the "ICC", which is based at 38 Cours Albert 1er, 75008
Paris, France), may have to be amended to comply with the applicable law. Although the ICC
publishes guides to these Uniform Rules, legal advice should be taken before the securities are
written. Note that the guaranteed amounts should be quoted in all the currencies, as specified in
the Contract, in which the guarantor pays the beneficiary.
Annexes FORMS OF SECURITIES
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 114 =====

23
Annex A EXAMPLE FORM OF PARENT COMPANY
GUARANTEE
[See page 3, and the comments on Sub-Clause 1.14 ]
Brief description of Contract       
Name and address of Employer 
(together with successors and assigns).
We have been informed that (hereinafter called the "Contractor") is submitting
an offer for such Contract in response to your invitation, and that the conditions of your invitation
require his offer to be supported by a parent company guarantee.
In consideration of you, the Employer, awarding the Contract to the Contractor, we (name of parent
company) irrevocably and unconditionally guarantee to you, as a primary
obligation, the due performance of all the Contractor's obligations and liabilities under the Contract,
including the Contractor's compliance with all its terms and conditions according to their true intent
and meaning.
If the Contractor fails to so perform his obligations and liabilities and comply with the Contract, we
will indemnify the Employer against and from all damages, losses and expenses (including legal fees
and expenses) which arise from any such failure for which the Contractor is liable to the Employer
under the Contract.
This guarantee shall come into full force and effect when the Contract comes into full force and
effect. If the Contract does not come into full force and effect within a year of the date of this
guarantee, or if you demonstrate that you do not intend to enter into the Contract with the
Contractor, this guarantee shall be void and ineffective. This guarantee shall continue in full force
and effect until all the Contractor's obligations and liabilities under the Contract have been
discharged, when this guarantee shall expire and shall be returned to us, and our liability hereunder
shall be discharged absolutely.
This guarantee shall apply and be supplemental to the Contract as amended or varied by the
Employer and the Contractor from time to time. We hereby authorise them to agree any such
amendment or variation, the due performance of which and compliance with which by the
Contractor are likewise guaranteed hereunder. Our obligations and liabilities under this guarantee
shall not be discharged by any allowance of time or other indulgence whatsoever by the
Employer to the Contractor, or by any variation or suspension of the works to be executed under
the Contract, or by any amendments to the Contract or to the constitution of the Contractor or
the Employer, or by any other matters, whether with or without our knowledge or consent.
This guarantee shall be governed by the law of the same country (or other jurisdiction) as that which
governs the Contract and any dispute under this guarantee shall be finally settled under the Rules
of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce by one or more arbitrators appointed in
accordance with such Rules. We confirm that the benefit of this guarantee may be assigned subject
only to the provisions for assignment of the Contract.
Date  Signature(s)  
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 115 =====

Annex B EXAMPLE FORM OF TENDER SECURITY
[See page 4]
Brief description of Contract           
Name and address of Beneficiary 
(whom the tender documents define as the Employer).
We have been informed that (hereinafter called the "Principal") is submitting
an offer for such Contract in response to your invitation, and that the conditions of your invitation
(the "conditions of invitation", which are set out in a document entitled Instructions to Tenderers)
require his offer to be supported by a tender security.
At the request of the Principal, we (
name of bank ) hereby irrevocably
undertake to pay you, the Beneficiary/Employer, any sum or sums not exceeding in total the
amount of  (say: ) upon receipt by us of your demand
in writing and your written statement (in the demand) stating that:
(a) the Principal has, without your agreement, withdrawn his offer after the latest time specified
for its submission and before the expiry of its period of validity,  or
(b) the Principal has refused to accept the correction of errors in his offer in accordance with
such conditions of invitation,  or
(c) you awarded the Contract to the Principal and he has failed to comply with sub-clause 1.6
of the conditions of the Contract,  or
(d) you awarded the Contract to the Principal and he has failed to comply with sub-clause 4.2
of the conditions of the Contract.
Any demand for payment must contain your signature(s) which must be authenticated by your
bankers or by a notary public. The authenticated demand and statement must be received by us
at this office on or before (
the date 35 days after the expiry of the validity of the Letter of Tender )
, when this guarantee shall expire and shall be returned to us.
This guarantee is subject to the Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees, published as number 458
by the International Chamber of Commerce, except as stated above.
Date  Signature(s)  
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 116 =====

25
Annex C: EXAMPLE FORM OF PERFORMANCE SECURITY -
DEMAND GUARANTEE
[See comments on Sub-Clause 4.2]
Brief description of Contract        
Name and address of Beneficiary  
(whom the Contract defines as the Employer).
We have been informed that (hereinafter called the "Principal") is your
contractor under such Contract, which requires him to obtain a performance security.
At the request of the Principal, we (
name of bank ) hereby irrevocably
undertake to pay you, the Beneficiary/Employer, any sum or sums not exceeding in total the
amount of (the "guaranteed amount", say: ) upon
receipt by us of your demand in writing and your written statement stating:
(a) that the Principal is in breach of his obligation(s) under the Contract,  and
(b) the respect in which the Principal is in breach.
[Following the receipt by us of an authenticated copy of the taking-over certificate for the whole of
the works under clause 10 of the conditions of the Contract, such guaranteed amount shall be
reduced by % and we shall promptly notify you that we have received such certificate and
have reduced the guaranteed amount accordingly.] 
(1)
Any demand for payment must contain your [minister's/directors'] (1) signature(s) which must be
authenticated by your bankers or by a notary public. The authenticated demand and statement
must be received by us at this office on or before (
the date 70 days after the expected expiry of the
Defects Notification Period for the Works ) (the "expiry date"), when this
guarantee shall expire and shall be returned to us.
We have been informed that the Beneficiary may require the Principal to extend this guarantee if the
performance certificate under the Contract has not been issued by the date 28 days prior to such
expiry date. We undertake to pay you such guaranteed amount upon receipt by us, within such
period of 28 days, of your demand in writing and your written statement that the performance
certificate has not been issued, for reasons attributable to the Principal, and that this guarantee has
not been extended.
This guarantee shall be governed by the laws of and shall be subject to the
Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees, published as number 458 by the International Chamber of
Commerce, except as stated above.
Date  Signature(s)  
(1) When writing the tender documents, the writer should ascertain whether to include the optional text,
shown in parentheses [ ]
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 117 =====

26
Annex D EXAMPLE FORM OF PERFORMANCE SECURITY  -
SURETY BOND
[See comments on Sub-Clause 4.2]
Brief description of Contract        
Name and address of Beneficiary  
(together with successors and assigns, all as defined in the Contract as the Employer).
By this Bond, (name and address of contractor) 
(who is the contractor under such Contract) as Principal and ( name and address of guarantor )
as Guarantor are irrevocably held and firmly bound
to the Beneficiary in the total amount of (the "Bond Amount", say:
) for the due performance of all such Principal's obligations and liabilities
under the Contract. [Such Bond Amount shall be reduced by % upon the issue of the taking-
over certificate for the whole of the works under clause 10 of the conditions of the Contract.] (1)
This Bond shall become effective on the Commencement Date defined in the Contract.
Upon Default by the Principal to perform any Contractual Obligation, or upon the occurrence of any of
the events and circumstances listed in sub-clause 15.2 of the conditions of the Contract, the Guarantor
shall satisfy and discharge the damages sustained by the Beneficiary due to such Default, event or
circumstances.
(2) However, the total liability of the Guarantor shall not exceed the Bond Amount.
The obligations and liabilities of the Guarantor shall not be discharged by any allowance of time or
other indulgence whatsoever by the Beneficiary to the Principal, or by any variation or suspension
of the works to be executed under the Contract, or by any amendments to the Contract or to the
constitution of the Principal or the Beneficiary, or by any other matters, whether with or without the
knowledge or consent of the Guarantor.
Any claim under this Bond must be received by the Guarantor on or before (
the date six months after
the expected expiry of the Defects Notification Period for the Works) (the "Expiry
Date"), when this Bond shall expire and shall be returned to the Guarantor.
The benefit of this Bond may be assigned subject to the provisions for assignment of the Contract,
and subject to the receipt by the Guarantor of evidence of full compliance with such provisions.
This Bond shall be governed by the law of the same country (or other jurisdiction) as that which
governs the Contract. This Bond incorporates and shall be subject to the Uniform Rules for
Contract Bonds, published as number 524 by the International Chamber of Commerce, and words
used in this Bond shall bear the meanings set out in such Rules.
Wherefore this Bond has been issued by the Principal and the Guarantor on (
date) 
Signature(s) for and on behalf of the Principal 
Signature(s) for and on behalf of the Guarantor 
(1) When writing the tender documents, the writer should ascertain whether to include the optional text,
shown in parentheses [ ]
(2) Insert: [and shall not be entitled to perform the Principal's obligations under the Contract.]
Or: [or at the option of the Guarantor (to be exercised in writing within 42 days of receiving the claim
specifying such Default) perform the Principal's obligations under the Contract.]
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 118 =====

27
Annex E EXAMPLE FORM OF ADVANCE PAYMENT
GUARANTEE
[See comments on Sub-Clause 14.2]
Brief description of Contract        
Name and address of Beneficiary  
(whom the Contract defines as the Employer).
We have been informed that (hereinafter called the "Principal") is your
contractor under such Contract and wishes to receive an advance payment, for which the Contract
requires him to obtain a guarantee.
At the request of the Principal, we ( name of bank ) hereby irrevocably
undertake to pay you, the Beneficiary/Employer, any sum or sums not exceeding in total the
amount of (the "guaranteed amount", say: ) upon
receipt by us of your demand in writing and your written statement stating:
(a) that the Principal has failed to repay the advance payment in accordance with the
conditions of the Contract, and
(b) the amount which the Principal has failed to repay.
This guarantee shall become effective upon receipt [of the first instalment] of the advance payment
by the Principal. Such guaranteed amount shall be reduced by the amounts of the advance
payment repaid to you, as evidenced by your notices issued under sub-clause 14.6 of the
conditions of the Contract. Following receipt (from the Principal) of a copy of each purported notice,
we shall promptly notify you of the revised guaranteed amount accordingly.
Any demand for payment must contain your signature(s) which must be authenticated by your
bankers or by a notary public. The authenticated demand and statement must be received by us
at this office on or before (
the date 70 days after the expected expiry of the Time for Completion )
(the "expiry date"), when this guarantee shall expire and shall be returned to us.
We have been informed that the Beneficiary may require the Principal to extend this guarantee if the
advance payment has not been repaid by the date 28 days prior to such expiry date. We undertake
to pay you such guaranteed amount upon receipt by us, within such period of 28 days, of your
demand in writing and your written statement that the advance payment has not been repaid and
that this guarantee has not been extended.
This guarantee shall be governed by the laws of and shall be subject to the
Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees, published as number 458 by the International Chamber of
Commerce, except as stated above.
Date  Signature(s)  
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 119 =====

28
Annex F EXAMPLE FORM OF RETENTION MONEY
GUARANTEE
[See comments on Sub-Clause 14.9]
Brief description of Contract        
Name and address of Beneficiary  
(whom the Contract defines as the Employer).
We have been informed that (hereinafter called the "Principal") is your
contractor under such Contract and wishes to receive early payment of [part of] the retention
money, for which the Contract requires him to obtain a guarantee.
At the request of the Principal, we ( name of bank ) hereby irrevocably
undertake to pay you, the Beneficiary/Employer, any sum or sums not exceeding in total the
amount of (the "guaranteed amount", say: ) upon
receipt by us of your demand in writing and your written statement stating:
(a) that the Principal has failed to carry out his obligation(s) to rectify certain defect(s) for which
he is responsible under the Contract, and
(b) the nature of such defect(s).
At any time, our liability under this guarantee shall not exceed the total amount of retention money
released to the Principal by you, as evidenced by your notices issued under sub-clause 14.6 of the
conditions of the Contract with a copy being passed to us.
Any demand for payment must contain your signature(s) which must be authenticated by your
bankers or by a notary public. The authenticated demand and statement must be received by us
at this office on or before (
the date 70 days after the expected expiry of the Defects Notification Period
for the Works) (the "expiry date"), when this guarantee shall expire and shall
be returned to us.
We have been informed that the Beneficiary may require the Principal to extend this guarantee if the
performance certificate under the Contract has not been issued by the date 28 days prior to such
expiry date. We undertake to pay you such guaranteed amount upon receipt by us, within such
period of 28 days, of your demand in writing and your written statement that the performance
certificate has not been issued, for reasons attributable to the Principal, and that this guarantee has
not been extended.
This guarantee shall be governed by the laws of and shall be subject to the
Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees, published as number 458 by the International Chamber of
Commerce, except as stated above.
Date  Signature(s)  
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 120 =====

29
Annex G EXAMPLE FORM OF PAYMENT GUARANTEE BY
EMPLOYER
[See page 18: Contractor Finance]
Brief description of Contract        
Name and address of Beneficiary  
(whom the Contract defines as the Contractor). 
We have been informed that (whom the Contract defines as the Employer and
who is hereinafter called the "Principal") is required to obtain a bank guarantee.
At the request of the Principal, we (
name of bank ) hereby irrevocably
undertake to pay you, the Beneficiary/Contractor, any sum or sums not exceeding in total the
amount of (say: ) upon receipt by us of your demand in
writing and your written statement stating:
(a) that, in respect of a payment due under the Contract, the Principal has failed to make
payment in full by the date fourteen days after the expiry of the period specified in the
Contract as that within which such payment should have been made, and
(b) the amount(s) which the Principal has failed to pay.
Any demand for payment must be accompanied by a copy of [ list of documents evidencing
entitlement to payment] , in respect of which the Principal has failed to make
payment in full.
Any demand for payment must contain your signature(s) which must be authenticated by your
bankers or by a notary public. The authenticated demand and statement must be received by us
at this office on or before (
the date six months after the expected expiry of the Defects Notification
Period for the Works ) when this guarantee shall expire and shall be returned
to us.
This guarantee shall be governed by the laws of and shall be subject to the
Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees, published as number 458 by the International Chamber of
Commerce, except as stated above.
Date  Signature(s)  
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 121 =====

FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES INGENIEURS-CONSEILS
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF CONSULTING ENGINEERS
INTERNATIONALE VEREINIGUNG BERATENDER INGENIEURE
FEDERACION INTERNACIONAL DE INGENIEROS CONSOLTORES
GENERAL CONDITIONS
GUIDANCE FOR THE
PREPARATION OF
PARTICULAR CONDITIONS
FORMS OF LETTER OF
TENDER, CONTRACT
AGREEMENT AND 
DISPUTE AD
JUDICATION
AGREEMENT
Conditions of Contract
for CONSTRUCTION
FOR BUILDING AND ENGINEERING WORKS
DESIGNED BY THE EMPLOYER
Forms of Letter of Tender, Contract Agreement
and Dispute Adjudication Agreement
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 122 =====

i
LETTER OF TENDER
NAME OF CONTRACT:
TO:
We have examined the Conditions of Contract, Specification, Drawings, Bill of Quantities, the other
Schedules, the attached Appendix and Addenda Nos for the
execution of the above-named Works. We offer to execute and complete the Works and remedy
any defects therein in conformity with this Tender which includes all these documents, for the sum
of (in currencies of payment) 
or such other sum as may be determined in accordance with the Conditions of Contract.
We accept your suggestions for the appointment of the DAB, as set out in Schedule 
[ We have completed the Schedule by adding our suggestions for the other Member of the
DAB, but these suggestions are not conditions of this offer ].*
We agree to abide by this Tender until and it shall remain binding upon us and may
be accepted at any time before that date. We acknowledge that the Appendix forms part of this
Letter of Tender.
If this offer is accepted, we will provide the specified Performance Security, commence the Works
as soon as is reasonably practicable after the Commencement Date, and complete the Works in
accordance with the above-named documents within the Time for Completion.
Unless and until a formal Agreement is prepared and executed this Letter of Tender, together with
your written acceptance thereof, shall constitute a binding contract between us.
We understand that you are not bound to accept the lowest or any tender you may receive.
Signature in the capacity of 
duly authorised to sign tenders for and on behalf of 
Address: 
Date:     
* If the Tenderer does not accept, this paragraph may be deleted and replaced by:
We do not accept your suggestions for the appointment of the DAB. We have included our
suggestions in the Schedule, but these suggestions are not conditions of this offer. If these
suggestions are not acceptable to you, we propose that the DAB be jointly appointed in
accordance with Sub-Clause 20.2 of the Conditions of Contract.
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 123 =====

ii
APPENDIX TO TENDER
[ Note: with the exception of the items for which the Employer's requirements have been
inserted, the following information must be completed before the Tender is submitted ]
Item
Employer's name and address  . . . . . .
Contractor's name and address  . . . . .
Engineer's name and address . . . . . . .
Time for Completion of the Works . . . .
Defects Notification Period  . . . . . . . . .
Electronic transmission systems  . . . . .
Governing Law  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ruling language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Language for communications  . . . . . .
Time for access to the Site . . . . . . . . .
Amount of Performance Security  . . . .
Normal working hours  . . . . . . . . . . . .
Delay damages for the Works . . . . . . .
Maximum amount of delay damages . .
If there are Provisional Sums:
Percentage for adjustment of
Provisional Sums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sub-Clause
1.1.2.2 & 1.3
1.1.2.3 & 1.3
1.1.2.4 & 1.3
1.1.3.3 . . . . . 
1.1.3.7 . . . . . 
1.3 . . . . . . . . 
1.4 . . . . . . . . 
1.4 . . . . . . . . 
1.4 . . . . . . . . 
2.1 . . . . . . . . 
4.2 . . . . . . . . 
6.5 . . . . . . . . 
8.7 & 14.15(b)
8.7 . . . . . . . . 
13.5(b) . . . . . 
Data
days
365 days
days after Commencement Date
% of the Accepted Contract 
Amount, in the currencies and
proportions in which the Contract
Price is payable
% of the final Contract Price per
day, in the currencies and proportions
in which the Contract Price is payable
% of the final Contract Price
%
Initials of signatory of Tender 
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 124 =====

iii
If Sub-Clause 13.8 applies:
Adjustments for Changes in Cost;
Table(s) of adjustment data  . . . . . . .
Total advance payment . . . . . . . . . . . .
Number and timing of instalments . . . .
Currencies and proportions  . . . . . . . .
Start repayment of advance payment  .
Repayment amortisation of advance
payment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Percentage of retention  . . . . . . . . . . .
Limit of Retention Money  . . . . . . . . . .
If Sub-Clause 14.5 applies:
Plant and Materials for payment
when shipped en route to the Site  . .
Plant and Materials for payment
when delivered to the Site  . . . . . . . .
Minimum amount of Interim Payment
Certificates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Currency/currencies of payment . . . .
13.8 . . . . . . . 
14.2 . . . . . . . 
14.2 . . . . . . . 
14.2 . . . . . . . 
14.2(a)
14.2(b) . . . . . 
14.3 . . . . . . . 
14.3 . . . . . . . 
14.5(b) . . . . . 
14.5(c) . . . . . 
14.6 . . . . . . . 
14.15 . . . . . . 
for payments each
month/[ 
YEAR ] in ( currency)
% of the Accepted Contract Amount
% in 
% in 
when payments are %
of the Accepted Contract Amount
less Provisional Sums
%
%
% of the Accepted Contract Amount
[list]
[list]
[list]
Coefficient;
scope of index
a= 0.10   Fixed
b=          Labour
c= 
d= 
e= 
Country of origin;
currency of index
Source of index;
Title/definition
Value on stated date(s)*
Value   Date 
* These values and dates confirm the definition of each index, but do not define Base Date indices
If payments are only to be made in a currency/currencies named on the first page of the Letter of Tender:
Initials of signatory of Tender 
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 125 =====

iv
Currencies of payment  . . . . . . . . . .
Periods for submission of insurance:
(a) evidence of insurance  . . . . . . . . .
(b) relevant policies  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Maximum amount of deductibles for
insurance of the Employer's risks  . . . .
Minimum amount of third party
insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Date by which the DAB shall be appointed  .
The DAB shall be  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Appointment (if not agreed) to be
made by  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14.15
18.1 . . . . . . . 
18.1 . . . . . . . 
18.2(d) . . . . . 
18.3 . . . . . . . 
20.2 . . . . . . . 
20.2 . . . . . . . 
20.3 . . . . . . . 
[list]
% of the Accepted Contract Amount
as named in the Letters of Tender
days
days
28 days after the Commencement
Date
Either:
One sole Member/adjudicator
Or:
Currency Unit
Local:    [ name]
Foreign:  [ name]
[name]
Percentage payable in the
Currency
Rate of exchange: number
of Local per unit of Foreign
1.000
[ In the above Appendix, the text shown in italics is intended to assist the drafter of a particular
contract by providing guidance on which provisions are relevant to the particular contract. This
italicised text should not be included in the tender documents, as it will generally appear
inappropriate to tenderers.]
Description
(Sub-Clause 1.1.5.6)
Time for Completion
(Sub-Clause 1.1.3.3)
Delay Damages
(Sub-Clause 8.7)
If there are Sections:
Definition of Sections:
If some payments are to be made in a currency/currencies not named on the first page of the Letter of Tender:
Initials of signatory of Tender 
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 126 =====

v
CONTRACT AGREEMENT
This Agreement made the day of 19 
Between of (hereinafter called "the Employer") of the one
part,
and       of (hereinafter called "the Contractor") of the
other part
Whereas the Employer desires that the Works known as should be executed
by the Contractor, and has accepted a Tender by the Contractor for the execution and
completion of these Works and the remedying of any defects therein,
The Employer and the Contractor agree as follows:
1. In this Agreement words and expressions shall have the same meanings as are
respectively assigned to them in the Conditions of Contract hereinafter referred to.
2. The following documents shall be deemed to form and be read and construed as part of
this Agreement:
(a) The Letter of Acceptance dated 
(b) The Letter of Tender dated 
(c) The Addenda nos 
(d) The Conditions of Contract
(e) The Specification
(f) The Drawings,  and
(g) The completed Schedules.
3. In consideration of the payments to be made by the Employer to the Contractor as
hereinafter mentioned, the Contractor hereby covenants with the Employer to execute
and complete the Works and remedy any defects therein, in conformity with the
provisions of the Contract.
4. The Employer hereby covenants to pay the Contractor, in consideration of the execution
and completion of the Works and the remedying of defects therein, the Contract Price at
the times and in the manner prescribed by the Contract.
In Witness whereof the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be executed the day and
SIGNED by:
for and on behalf of the Employer in the presence
of
Witness:
Name:
Address:
Date: 
SIGNED by: 
for and on behalf of the Contractor in the presence
of
Witness: 
Name: 
Address:
Date: 
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 127 =====

vi Conditions of Contract for Construction
DISPUTE ADJUDICATION AGREEMENT
[for a one-person DAB]
Name and details of Contract
Name and address of Employer
Name and address of Contractor
Name and address of Member
Whereas the Employer and the Contractor have entered into the Contract and desire jointly to
appoint the Member to act as sole adjudicator who is also called the "DAB".
The Employer, Contractor and Member jointly agree as follows:
1. The conditions of this Dispute Adjudication Agreement comprise the "General Conditions of
Dispute Adjudication Agreement", which is appended to the General Conditions of the
"Conditions of Contract for Construction" First Edition 1999 published by the Fédération
Internationale des Ingénieurs-Conseils (FIDIC), and the following provisions. In these
provisions, which include amendments and additions to the General Conditions of Dispute
Adjudication Agreement, words and expressions shall have the same meanings as are
assigned to them in the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement.
2. [ Details of amendments to the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement, if any.
For example:
In the procedural rules annexed to the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication
Agreement, Rule _ is deleted and replaced by:  " … " ]
3. In accordance with Clause 6 of the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement,
the Member shall be paid as follows:
A retainer fee of  per calendar month,
plus a daily fee of per day.
4. In consideration of these fees and other payments to be made by the Employer and the
Contractor in accordance with Clause 6 of the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication
Agreement, the Member undertakes to act as the DAB (as adjudicator) in accordance with
this Dispute Adjudication Agreement.
5. The Employer and the Contractor jointly and severally undertake to pay the Member, in
consideration of the carrying out of these services, in accordance with Clause 6 of the
General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement.
6. This Dispute Adjudication Agreement shall be governed by the law of 
SIGNED by:
for and on behalf of the Employer
in the presence of
Witness:
Name:
Address:
Date: 
SIGNED by: 
for and on behalf of the Contractor
in the presence of
Witness: 
Name: 
Address:
Date: 
SIGNED by:
The Member in the presence of
Witness
Name:
Address:
Date: 
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net

===== PDF PAGE 128 =====

vii
DISPUTE ADJUDICATION AGREEMENT
[for each member of a three-person DAB]
Name and details of Contract
Name and address of Employer
Name and address of Contractor
Name and address of Member
Whereas the Employer and the Contractor have entered into the Contract and desire jointly to
appoint the Member to act as one of the three persons who are jointly called the "DAB" [and desire
the Member to act as chairman of the DAB ].
The Employer, Contractor and Member jointly agree as follows:
1. The conditions of this Dispute Adjudication Agreement comprise the "General Conditions of
Dispute Adjudication Agreement", which is appended to the General Conditions of the
"Conditions of Contract for Construction" First Edition 1999 published by the Fédération
Internationale des Ingénieurs-Conseils (FIDIC), and the following provisions. In these
provisions, which include amendments and additions to the General Conditions of Dispute
Adjudication Agreement, words and expressions shall have the same meanings as are
assigned to them in the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement.
2. [ Details of amendments to the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement, if any.
For example:
In the procedural rules annexed to the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication
Agreement, Rule _ is deleted and replaced by:  " … " ]
3. In accordance with Clause 6 of the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement,
the Member shall be paid as follows:
A retainer fee of   per calendar month,
plus a daily fee of per day.
4. In consideration of these fees and other payments to be made by the Employer and the
Contractor in accordance with Clause 6 of the General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication
Agreement, the Member undertakes to serve, as described in this Dispute Adjudication
Agreement, as one of the three persons who are jointly to act as the DAB.
5. The Employer and the Contractor jointly and severally undertake to pay the Member, in
consideration of the carrying out of these services, in accordance with Clause 6 of the
General Conditions of Dispute Adjudication Agreement.
6. This Dispute Adjudication Agreement shall be governed by the law of 
SIGNED by:
for and on behalf of the Employer
in the presence of
Witness:
Name:
Address:
Date: 
SIGNED by: 
for and on behalf of the Contractor
in the presence of
Witness: 
Name: 
Address:
Date: 
SIGNED by:
for and on behalf of the Employer
in the presence of
Witness
Name:
Address:
Date: 
Licensed copy: scottwilson, Scott Wilson Holdings, 20/01/2010, Uncontrolled Copy, ®FIDIC
Mustafa USALAN 
0 532 4712921 
mustafa@usalan.net